
=Capital, by Karl Marx =


== Preface to the First German Edition (Marx, 1867) = =

The work, the first volume of which I now submit to the public, forms
the continuation of my ("A Contribution to the Criticism of Political
Economy") published in 1859. The long pause between the first part and
the continuation is due to an illness of many years' duration that
again and again interrupted my work.

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in the first three
chapters of this volume. This is done not merely for the sake of
connexion and completeness. The presentation of the subject matter is
improved. As far as circumstances in any way permit, many points only
hinted at in the earlier book are here worked out more fully, whilst,
conversely, points worked out fully there are only touched upon in this
volume. The sections on the history of the theories of value and of
money are now, of course, left out altogether. The reader of the
earlier work will find, however, in the notes to the first chapter
additional sources of reference relative to the history of those
theories.

Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the
first chapter, especially the section that contains the analysis of
commodities, will, therefore, present the greatest difficulty. That
which concerns more especially the analysis of the substance of value
and the magnitude of value, I have, as much as it was possible,
popularised. The value-form, whose fully developed shape is the
money-form, is very elementary and simple. Nevertheless, the human mind
has for more than 2,000 years sought in vain to get to the bottom of it
all, whilst on the other hand, to the successful analysis of much more
composite and complex forms, there has been at least an approximation.
Why? Because the body, as an organic whole, is more easy of study than
are the cells of that body. In the analysis of economic forms,
moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical reagents are of use. The
force of abstraction must replace both. But in bourgeois society, the
commodity-form of the product of labour -- or value-form of the
commodity -- is the economic cell-form. To the superficial observer,
the analysis of these forms seems to turn upon minutiae. It does in
fact deal with minutiae, but they are of the same order as those dealt
with in microscopic anatomy.

With the exception of the section of value-form, therefore, this volume
cannot stand accused on the score of difficulty. I presuppose, of
course, a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to
think for himself.

The physicist either observes physical phenomena where they occur in
their most typical form and most free from disturbing influence, or,
wherever possible, he makes experiments under conditions that assure
the occurrence of the phenomenon in its normality. In this work I have
to examine the capitalist mode of production, and the conditions of
production and exchange corresponding to that mode. Up to the present
time, their classic ground is England. That is the reason why England
is used as the chief illustration in the development of my theoretical
ideas. If, however, the German reader shrugs his shoulders at the
condition of the English industrial and agricultural labourers, or in
optimist fashion comforts himself with the thought that in Germany
things are not nearly so bad; I must plainly tell him, "De te fabula
narratur!"


   Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree of
   development of the social antagonisms that result from the natural
   laws of capitalist production. It is a question of these laws
   themselves, of these tendencies working with iron necessity towards
   inevitable results. The country that is more developed industrially
   only shows, to the less developed, the image of its own future.
   
But apart from this. Where capitalist production is fully naturalised
among the Germans (for instance, in the factories proper) the condition
of things is much worse than in England, because the counterpoise of
the Factory Acts is wanting. In all other spheres, we, like all the
rest of Continental Western Europe, suffer not only from the
development of capitalist production, but also from the incompleteness
of that development. Alongside the modern evils, a whole series of
inherited evils oppress us, arising from the passive survival of
antiquated modes of production, with their inevitable train of social
and political anachronisms. We suffer not only from the living, but
from the dead. "Le mort saisit le vif!"


   The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental Western
   Europe are, in comparison with those of England, wretchedly
   compiled. But they raise the veil just enough to let us catch a
   glimpse of the Medusa head behind it. We should be appalled at the
   state of things at home, if, as in England, our governments and
   parliaments appointed periodically commissions of inquiry into
   economic conditions; if these commissions were armed with the same
   plenary powers to get at the truth; if it was possible to find for
   this purpose men as competent, as free from partisanship and respect
   of persons as are the English factory-inspectors, her medical
   reporters on public health, her commissioners of inquiry into the
   exploitation of women and children, into housing and food. Perseus
   wore a magic cap down over his eyes and ears as a make-believe that
   there are no monsters.
   
Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, the
American war of independence sounded the tocsin for the European middle
class, so that in the 19th century, the American Civil War sounded it
for the European working class. In England the process of social
disintegration is palpable. When it has reached a certain point, it
must react on the Continent. There it will take a form more brutal or
more humane, according to the degree of development of the working
class itself. Apart from higher motives, therefore, their own most
important interests dictate to the classes that are for the nonce the
ruling ones, the removal of all legally removable hindrances to the
free development of the working class. For this reason, as well as
others, I have given so large a space in this volume to the history,
the details, and the results of English factory legislation. One nation
can and should learn from others. And even when a society has got upon
the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of its movement
-- and it is the ultimate aim of this work, to lay bare the economic
law of motion of modern society -- it can neither clear by bold leaps,
nor remove by legal enactments, the obstacles offered by the successive
phases of its normal development. But it can shorten and lessen the
birth-pangs.

To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I paint the capitalist
and the landlord in no sense "couleur de rose"


. But here individuals are dealt with only in so far as they are the
personifications of economic categories, embodiments of particular
class-relations and class-interests. My standpoint, from which the
evolution of the economic formation of society is viewed as a process
of natural history, can less than any other make the individual
responsible for relations whose creature he socially remains, however
much he may subjectively raise himself above them.

In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific inquiry meets not
merely the same enemies as in all other domains. The peculiar nature of
the materials it deals with, summons as foes into the field of battle
the most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human breast, the
Furies of private interest. The English Established Church, e.g., will
more readily pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles than on 1/39 of
its income. Now-a-days atheism is "culpa levis"

, as compared with criticism of existing property relations.
Nevertheless, there is an unmistakable advance. I refer, e.g., to the
Blue book published within the last few weeks: 'Correspondence with Her
Majesty's Missions Abroad, regarding Industrial Questions and Trades'
Unions.' The representatives of the English Crown in foreign countries
there declare in so many words that in Germany, in France, to be brief,
in all the civilised states of the European Continent, radical change
in the existing relations between capital and labour is as evident and
inevitable as in England. At the same time, on the other side of the
Atlantic Ocean, Mr. Wade, vice-president of the United States, declared
in public meetings that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical
change of the relations of capital and of property in land is next upon
the order of the day. These are signs of the times, not to be hidden by
purple mantles or black cassocks. They do not signify that tomorrow a
miracle will happen. They show that, within the ruling classes
themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the present society is no
solid crystal, but an organism capable of change, and is constantly
changing.

The second volume of this book will treat of the process of the
circulation of capital (Book II.), and of the varied forms assumed by
capital in the course of its development (Book III.), the third and
last volume (Book IV.), the history of the theory.

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. As to prejudices
of so-called public opinion, to which I have never made concessions,
now as aforetime the maxim of the great Florentine is mine:

'Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti.'


   ""Karl Marx""LondonJuly 25, 1867
   
== Preface to the French Edition (Marx, 1872) = =

To the citizen Maurice Lach√¢tre

Dear Citizen,

I applaud your idea of publishing the translation of 'Das Kapital' as a
serial. In this form the book will be more accessible to the working
class, a consideration which to me outweighs everything else.

That is the good side of your suggestion, but here is the reverse of
the medal: the method of analysis which I have employed, and which had
not previously been applied to economic subjects, makes the reading of
the first chapters rather arduous, and it is to be feared that the
French public, always impatient to come to a conclusion, eager to know
the connexion between general principles and the immediate questions
that have aroused their passions, may be disheartened because they will
be unable to move on at once.

That is a disadvantage I am powerless to overcome, unless it be by
forewarning and forearming those readers who zealously seek the truth.
There is no royal road to science, and only those who do not dread the
fatiguing climb of its steep paths have a chance of gaining its
luminous summits.

Believe me,dear citizen,Your devoted,

"Karl Marx"LondonMarch 18, 1872


== Afterword to the Second German Edition (1873) = =

I must start by informing the readers of the first edition about the
alterations made in the second edition. One is struck at once by the
clearer arrangement of the book. Additional notes are everywhere marked
as notes to the second edition. The following are the most important
points with regard to the text itself:

In , the derivation of value from an analysis of the equations by which
every exchange-value is expressed has been carried out with greater
scientific strictness; likewise the connexion between the substance of
value and the determination of the magnitude of value by socially
necessary labour-time, which was only alluded to in the first edition,
is now expressly emphasised.

 (the Form of Value), has been completely revised, a task which was
 made necessary by the double exposition in the first edition, if
 nothing else. -- Let me remark, in passing, that that double
 exposition had been occasioned by my friend, Dr. L Kugelmann in
 Hanover. I was visiting him in the spring of 1867 when the first
 proof-sheets arrived from Hamburg, and he convinced me that most
 readers needed a supplementary, more didactic explanation of the form
 of value. -- The last section of the first chapter, 'The Fetishism of
 Commodities, etc.,' has largely been altered. Chapter III, Section I
 (The Measure of Value), has been carefully revised, because in the
 first edition this section had been treated negligently, the reader
 having been referred to the explanation already given in 'Zur Kritik
 der Politischen Oekonomie,' Berlin 1859. Chapter VII, particularly
 Part 2 ], has been re-written to a great extent. It would be a waste
 of time to go into all the partial textual changes, which were often
 purely stylistic. They occur throughout the book. Nevertheless I find
 now, on revising the French translation appearing in Paris, that
 several parts of the German original stand in need of rather thorough
 remoulding, other parts require rather heavy stylistic editing, and
 still others painstaking elimination of occasional slips. But there
 was no time for that. For I had been informed only in the autumn of
 1871, when in the midst of other urgent work, that the book was sold
 out and that the printing of the second edition was to begin in
 January of 1872.
 
The appreciation which 'Das Kapital' rapidly gained in wide circles of
the German working class is the best reward of my labours. Herr Mayer,
a Vienna manufacturer, who in economic matters represents the bourgeois
point of view, in a pamphlet published during the Franco-German War
aptly expounded the idea that the great capacity for theory, which used
to be considered a hereditary German possession, had almost completely
disappeared amongst the so-called educated classes in Germany, but that
amongst its working class, on the contrary, that capacity was
celebrating its revival.

To the present moment Political Economy, in Germany, is a foreign
science. Gustav von Gulich in his 'Historical description of Commerce,
Industry,' &c., especially in the two first volumes published in 1830,
has examined at length the historical circumstances that prevented, in
Germany, the development of the capitalist mode of production, and
consequently the development, in that country, of modern bourgeois
society. Thus the soil whence Political Economy springs was wanting.
This 'science' had to be imported from England and France as a
ready-made article; its German professors remained schoolboys. The
theoretical expression of a foreign reality was turned, in their hands,
into a collection of dogmas, interpreted by them in terms of the petty
trading world around them, and therefore misinterpreted. The feeling of
scientific impotence, a feeling not wholly to be repressed, and the
uneasy consciousness of having to touch a subject in reality foreign to
them, was but imperfectly concealed, either under a parade of literary
and historical erudition, or by an admixture of extraneous material,
borrowed from the so-called 'Kameral' sciences, a medley of
smatterings, through whose purgatory the hopeful candidate for the
German bureaucracy has to pass.

Since 1848 capitalist production has developed rapidly in Germany, and
at the present time it is in the full bloom of speculation and
swindling. But fate is still unpropitious to our professional
economists. At the time when they were able to deal with Political
Economy in a straightforward fashion, modern economic conditions did
not actually exist in Germany. And as soon as these conditions did come
into existence, they did so under circumstances that no longer allowed
of their being really and impartially investigated within the bounds of
the bourgeois horizon. In so far as Political Economy remains within
that horizon, in so far, i.e., as the capitalist regime is looked upon
as the absolutely final form of social production, instead of as a
passing historical phase of its evolution, Political Economy can remain
a science only so long as the class struggle is latent or manifests
itself only in isolated and sporadic phenomena.

Let us take England. Its Political Economy belongs to the period in
which the class struggle was as yet undeveloped. Its last great
representative, Ricardo, in the end, consciously makes the antagonism
of class interests, of wages and profits, of profits and rent, the
starting point of his investigations, naively taking this antagonism
for a social law of Nature. But by this start the science of bourgeois
economy had reached the limits beyond which it could not pass. Already
in the lifetime of Ricardo, and in opposition to him, it was met by
criticism, in the person of Sismondi.

The succeeding period, from 1820 to 1830, was notable in England for
scientific activity in the domain of Political Economy. It was the time
as well of the vulgarising and extending of Ricardo's theory, as of the
contest of that theory with the old school. Splendid tournaments were
held. What was done then, is little known to the Continent generally,
because the polemic is for the most part scattered through articles in
reviews, occasional literature and pamphlets. The unprejudiced
character of this polemic -- although the theory of Ricardo already
serves, in exceptional cases, as a weapon of attack upon bourgeois
economy -- is explained by the circumstances of the time. On the one
hand, modern industry itself was only just emerging from the age of
childhood, as is shown by the fact that with the crisis of 1825 it for
the first time opens the periodic cycle of its modern life. On the
other hand, the class struggle between capital and labour is forced
into the background, politically by the discord between the governments
and the feudal aristocracy gathered around the Holy Alliance on the one
hand, and the popular masses, led by the bourgeoisie, on the other;
economically by the quarrel between industrial capital and aristocratic
landed property - a quarrel that in France was concealed by the
opposition between small and large landed property, and that in England
broke out openly after the Corn Laws. The literature of Political
Economy in England at this time calls to mind the stormy forward
movement in France after Dr. Quesnay's death, but only as a Saint
Martin's summer reminds us of spring. With the year 1830 came the
decisive crisis.

In France and in England the bourgeoisie had conquered political power.
Thenceforth, the class struggle, practically as well as theoretically,
took on more and more outspoken and threatening forms. It sounded the
knell of scientific bourgeois economy. It was thenceforth no longer a
question, whether this theorem or that was true, but whether it was
useful to capital or harmful, expedient or inexpedient, politically
dangerous or not. In place of disinterested inquirers, there were hired
prize fighters; in place of genuine scientific research, the bad
conscience and the evil intent of apologetic. Still, even the obtrusive
pamphlets with which the Anti-Corn Law League, led by the manufacturers
Cobden and Bright, deluged the world, have a historic interest, if no
scientific one, on account of their polemic against the landed
aristocracy. But since then the Free Trade legislation, inaugurated by
Sir Robert Peel, has deprived vulgar economy of this its last sting.

The Continental revolution of 1848-9 also had its reaction in England.
Men who still claimed some scientific standing and aspired to be
something more than mere sophists and sycophants of the ruling classes
tried to harmonise the Political Economy of capital with the claims, no
longer to be ignored, of the proletariat. Hence a shallow syncretism of
which John Stuart Mill is the best representative. It is a declaration
of bankruptcy by bourgeois economy, an event on which the great Russian
scholar and critic, N. Tschernyschewsky, has thrown the light of a
master mind in his 'Outlines of Political Economy according to Mill.'

In Germany, therefore, the capitalist mode of production came to a
head, after its antagonistic character had already, in France and
England, shown itself in a fierce strife of classes. And meanwhile,
moreover, the German proletariat had attained a much more clear
class-consciousness than the German bourgeoisie. Thus, at the very
moment when a bourgeois science of Political Economy seemed at last
possible in Germany, it had in reality again become impossible.

Under these circumstances its professors fell into two groups. The one
set, prudent, practical business folk, flocked to the banner of
Bastiat, the most superficial and therefore the most adequate
representative of the apologetic of vulgar economy; the other, proud of
the professorial dignity of their science, followed John Stuart Mill in
his attempt to reconcile irreconcilables. Just as in the classical time
of bourgeois economy, so also in the time of its decline, the Germans
remained mere schoolboys, imitators and followers, petty retailers and
hawkers in the service of the great foreign wholesale concern.

The peculiar historical development of German society therefore
forbids, in that country, all original work in bourgeois economy; but
not the criticism of that economy. So far as such criticism represents
a class, it can only represent the class whose vocation in history is
the overthrow of the capitalist mode of production and the final
abolition of all classes -- the proletariat.

The learned and unlearned spokesmen of the German bourgeoisie tried at
first to kill 'Das Kapital' by silence, as they had managed to do with
my earlier writings. As soon as they found that these tactics no longer
fitted in with the conditions of the time, they wrote, under pretence
of criticising my book, prescriptions 'for the tranquillisation of the
bourgeois mind.' But they found in the workers' press -- see, e.g.,
Joseph Dietzgen's articles in the -- antagonists stronger than
themselves, to whom (down to this very day) they owe a reply.

An excellent Russian translation of 'Das Kapital' appeared in the
spring of 1872. The edition of 3,000 copies is already nearly
exhausted. As early as 1871, N. Sieber, Professor of Political Economy
in the University of Kiev, in his work 'David Ricardo's Theory of Value
and of Capital,' referred to my theory of value, of money and of
capital, as in its fundamentals a necessary sequel to the teaching of
Smith and Ricardo. That which astonishes the Western European in the
reading of this excellent work, is the author's consistent and firm
grasp of the purely theoretical position.

That the method employed in 'Das Kapital' has been little understood,
is shown by the various conceptions, contradictory one to another, that
have been formed of it.

Thus the "Paris Revue Positiviste" reproaches me in that, on the one
hand, I treat economics metaphysically, and on the other hand --
imagine! -- confine myself to the mere critical analysis of actual
facts, instead of writing receipts (Comtist ones?) for the cook-shops
of the future. In answer to the reproach in re metaphysics, Professor
Sieber has it:

'In so far as it deals with actual theory, the method of Marx is the
deductive method of the whole English school, a school whose failings
and virtues are common to the best theoretic economists.'

M. Block -- 'Les Th√©oriciens du Socialisme en Allemagne. Extrait du
Journal des Economistes, Juillet et Ao√ªt 1872' -- makes the discovery
that my method is analytic and says: 'Par cet ouvrage M. Marx se classe
parmi les esprits analytiques les plus eminents.' German reviews, of
course, shriek out at 'Hegelian sophistics.' The "European Messenger"
of St. Petersburg in an article dealing exclusively with the method of
'Das Kapital' (May number, 1872, pp. 427-436), finds my method of
inquiry severely realistic, but my method of presentation,
unfortunately, German-dialectical. It says:

'At first sight, if the judgment is based on the external form of the
presentation of the subject, Marx is the most ideal of ideal
philosophers, always in the German, i.e., the bad sense of the word.
But in point of fact he is infinitely more realistic than all his
forerunners in the work of economic criticism. He can in no sense be
called an idealist.'

I cannot answer the writer better than by aid of a few extracts from
his own criticism, which may interest some of my readers to whom the
Russian original is inaccessible.

After a quotation from the preface to my 'Criticism of Political
Economy,' Berlin, 1859, pp. IV-VII, where I discuss the materialistic
basis of my method, the writer goes on:

'The one thing which is of moment to Marx, is to find the law of the
phenomena with whose investigation he is concerned; and not only is
that law of moment to him, which governs these phenomena, in so far as
they have a definite form and mutual connexion within a given
historical period. Of still greater moment to him is the law of their
variation, of their development, i.e., of their transition from one
form into another, from one series of connexions into a different one.
This law once discovered, he investigates in detail the effects in
which it manifests itself in social life. Consequently, Marx only
troubles himself about one thing: to show, by rigid scientific
investigation, the necessity of successive determinate orders of social
conditions, and to establish, as impartially as possible, the facts
that serve him for fundamental starting-points. For this it is quite
enough, if he proves, at the same time, both the necessity of the
present order of things, and the necessity of another order into which
the first must inevitably pass over; and this all the same, whether men
believe or do not believe it, whether they are conscious or unconscious
of it. Marx treats the social movement as a process of natural history,
governed by laws not only independent of human will, consciousness and
intelligence, but rather, on the contrary, determining that will,
consciousness and intelligence. ... If in the history of civilisation
the conscious element plays a part so subordinate, then it is
self-evident that a critical inquiry whose subject-matter is
civilisation, can, less than anything else, have for its basis any form
of, or any result of, consciousness. That is to say, that not the idea,
but the material phenomenon alone can serve as its starting-point. Such
an inquiry will confine itself to the confrontation and the comparison
of a fact, not with ideas, but with another fact. For this inquiry, the
one thing of moment is, that both facts be investigated as accurately
as possible, and that they actually form, each with respect to the
other, different momenta of an evolution; but most important of all is
the rigid analysis of the series of successions, of the sequences and
concatenations in which the different stages of such an evolution
present themselves. But it will be said, the general laws of economic
life are one and the same, no matter whether they are applied to the
present or the past. This Marx directly denies. According to him, such
abstract laws do not exist. On the contrary, in his opinion every
historical period has laws of its own. ... As soon as society has
outlived a given period of development, and is passing over from one
given stage to another, it begins to be subject also to other laws. In
a word, economic life offers us a phenomenon analogous to the history
of evolution in other branches of biology. The old economists
misunderstood the nature of economic laws when they likened them to the
laws of physics and chemistry. A more thorough analysis of phenomena
shows that social organisms differ among themselves as fundamentally as
plants or animals. Nay, one and the same phenomenon falls under quite
different laws in consequence of the different structure of those
organisms as a whole, of the variations of their individual organs, of
the different conditions in which those organs function, &c. Marx,
e.g., denies that the law of population is the same at all times and in
all places. He asserts, on the contrary, that every stage of
development has its own law of population. ... With the varying degree
of development of productive power, social conditions and the laws
governing them vary too. Whilst Marx sets himself the task of following
and explaining from this point of view the economic system established
by the sway of capital, he is only formulating, in a strictly
scientific manner, the aim that every accurate investigation into
economic life must have. The scientific value of such an inquiry lies
in the disclosing of the special laws that regulate the origin,
existence, development, death of a given social organism and its
replacement by another and higher one. And it is this value that, in
point of fact, Marx's book has.'


Whilst the writer pictures what he takes to be actually my method, in
this striking and generous way, what else is he picturing but the
dialectic method?


Of course the method of presentation must differ in form from that of
inquiry. The latter has to appropriate the material in detail, to
analyse its different forms of development, to trace out their inner
connexion. Only after this work is done, can the actual movement be
adequately described. If this is done successfully, if the life of the
subject-matter is ideally reflected as in a mirror, then it may appear
as if we had before us a mere a priori construction.

My dialectic method is not only different from the Hegelian, but is its
direct opposite. To Hegel, the life process of the human brain, i.e.,
the process of thinking, which, under the name of 'the Idea,' he even
transforms into an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real
world, and the real world is only the external, phenomenal form of 'the
Idea.' With me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the
material world reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms
of thought.

The mystifying side of Hegelian dialectic I criticised nearly thirty
years ago, at a time when it was still the fashion. But just as I was
working at the first volume of 'Das Kapital,' it was the good pleasure
of the peevish, arrogant, mediocre ÔÅÖÔÅ∞ÔÅ©ÔÅßÔÅØÔÅÆÔÅØÔÅ©


 who now talk large in cultured Germany, to treat Hegel in same way as
 the brave Moses Mendelssohn in Lessing's time treated Spinoza, i.e.,
 as a 'dead dog.' I therefore openly avowed myself the pupil of that
 mighty thinker, and even here and there, in the chapter on the theory
 of value, coquetted with the modes of expression peculiar to him. The
 mystification which dialectic suffers in Hegel's hands, by no means
 prevents him from being the first to present its general form of
 working in a comprehensive and conscious manner. With him it is
 standing on its head. It must be turned right side up again, if you
 would discover the rational kernel within the mystical shell. In its
 mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany, because it
 seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state of things. In
 its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and
 its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension
 and affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the
 same time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its
 inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically
 developed social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into
 account its transient nature not less than its momentary existence;
 because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical
 and revolutionary.
 
The contradictions inherent in the movement of capitalist society
impress themselves upon the practical bourgeois most strikingly in the
changes of the periodic cycle, through which modern industry runs, and
whose crowning point is the universal crisis. That crisis is once again
approaching, although as yet but in its preliminary stage; and by the
universality of its theatre and the intensity of its action it will
drum dialectics even into the heads of the mushroom-upstarts of the
new, holy Prusso-German empire.

"Karl Marx"LondonJanuary 24, 1873


== Afterword to the French Edition (1875) = =

Mr. J. Roy set himself the task of producing a version that would be as
exact and even literal as possible, and has scrupulously fulfilled it.
But his very scrupulosity has compelled me to modify his text, with a
view to rendering it more intelligible to the reader. These
alterations, introduced from day to day, as the book was published in
parts, were not made with equal care and were bound to result in a lack
of harmony in style.

Having once undertaken this work of revision, I was led to apply it
also to the basic original text (the second German edition), to
simplify some arguments, to complete others, to give additional
historical or statistical material, to add critical suggestions, etc.
Hence, whatever the literary defects of this French edition may be, it
possesses a scientific value independent of the original and should be
consulted even by readers familiar with German.

Below I give the passages in the Afterword to the second German edition
which treat of the development of Political Economy in Germany and the
method employed in the present work.

"Karl Marx" London April 28, 1875

== Preface to the Third German Edition (1883) = =

Marx was not destined to get this, the third, edition ready for press
himself. The powerful thinker, to whose greatness even his opponents
now make obeisance, died on March 14, 1883.

Upon me who in Marx lost the best, the truest friend I had -- and had
for forty years -- the friend to whom I am more indebted than can be
expressed in words -- upon me now devolved the duty of attending to the
publication of this third edition, as well as of the second volume,
which Marx had left behind in manuscript. I must now account here to
the reader for the way in which I discharged the first part of my duty.

It was Marx's original intention to re-write a great part of the text
of Volume I, to formulate many theoretical points more exactly, insert
new ones and bring historical and statistical materials up to date. But
his ailing condition and the urgent need to do the final editing of
Volume II induced him to give up this scheme. Only the most necessary
alterations were to be made, only the insertions which the French
edition ('Le Capital.' Par Karl Marx. Paris, Lach√¢tre 1873) already
contained, were to be put in.


Among the books left by Marx there was a German copy which he himself
had corrected here and there and provided with references to the French
edition; also a French copy in which he had indicated the exact
passages to be used. These alterations and additions are confined, with
few exceptions, to the last part of the book: 'The Accumulation of
Capital.' Here the previous text followed the original draft more
closely than elsewhere, while the preceding sections had been gone over
more thoroughly. The style was therefore more vivacious, more of a
single cast, but also more careless, studded with Anglicisms and in
parts unclear; there were gaps here and there in the presentation of
arguments, some important particulars being merely alluded to.


With regard to the style, Marx had himself thoroughly revised several
sub-sections and thereby had indicated to me here, as well as in
numerous oral suggestions, the length to which I could go in
eliminating English technical terms and other Anglicisms. Marx would in
any event have gone over the additions and supplemental texts and have
replaced the smooth French with his own terse German; I had to be
satisfied, when transferring them, with bringing them into maximum
harmony with the original text.

Thus not a single word was changed in this third edition without my
firm conviction that the author would have altered it himself. It would
never occur to me to introduce into 'Das Kapital' the current jargon in
which German economists are wont to express themselves -- that
gibberish in which, for instance, one who for cash has others give him
their labour is called a labour-giver (Arbeitgeber) and one whose
labour is taken away from him for wages is called a labour-taker
(Arbeitnehmer). In French, too, the word 'travail' is used in every-day
life in the sense of 'occupation.' But the French would rightly
consider any economist crazy should he call the capitalist a donneur de
travail (a labour-giver) or the worker a receveur de travail (a
labour-taker).

Nor have I taken the liberty to convert the English coins and moneys,
measures and weights used throughout the text to their new-German
equivalents. When the first edition appeared there were as many kinds
of measures and weights in Germany as there are days in the year.
Besides there were two kinds of marks (the Reichsmark existed at the
time only in the imagination of Soetbeer, who had invented it in the
late thirties), two kinds of gulden and at least three kinds of taler,
including one called neues Zweidrittel. In the natural sciences the
metric system prevailed, in the world market -- English measures and
weights. Under such circumstances English units of measure were quite
natural for a book which had to take its factual proofs almost
exclusively from British industrial relations. The last-named reason is
decisive even to-day, especially because the corresponding relations in
the world market have hardly changed and English weights and measures
almost completely control precisely the key industries, iron and
cotton.

In conclusion a few words on Marx's art of quotation, which is so
little understood. When they are pure statements of fact or
descriptions, the quotations, from the English Blue books, for example,
serve of course as simple documentary proof. But this is not so when
the theoretical views of other economists are cited. Here the quotation
is intended merely to state where, when and by whom an economic idea
conceived in the course of development was first clearly enunciated.
Here the only consideration is that the economic conception in question
must be of some significance to the history of science, that it is the
more or less adequate theoretical expression of the economic situation
of its time. But whether this conception still possesses any absolute
or relative validity from the standpoint of the author or whether it
already has become wholly past history is quite immaterial. Hence these
quotations are only a running commentary to the text, a commentary
borrowed from the history of economic science, and establish the dates
and originators of certain of the more important advances in economic
theory. And that was a very necessary thing in a science whose
historians have so far distinguished themselves only by tendentious
ignorance characteristic of careerists. It will now be understandable
why Marx, in consonance with the Afterword to the second edition, only
in very exceptional cases had occasion to quote German economists.

There is hope that the second volume will appear in the course of 1884.

"Frederick Engels" London November 7, 1883

== Preface to the English Edition (Engels, 1886) = =

The publication of an English version of 'Das Kapital' needs no
apology. On the contrary, an explanation might be expected why this
English version has been delayed until now, seeing that for some years
past the theories advocated in this book have been constantly referred
to, attacked and defended, interpreted and misinterpreted, in the
periodical press and the current literature of both England and
America.

When, soon after the author's death in 1883, it became evident that an
English edition of the work was really required, Mr. Samuel Moore, for
many years a friend of Marx and of the present writer, and than whom,
perhaps, no one is more conversant with the book itself, consented to
undertake the translation which the literary executors of Marx were
anxious to lay before the public. It was understood that I should
compare the MS. with the original work, and suggest such alterations as
I might deem advisable. When, by and by, it was found that Mr. Moore's
professional occupations prevented him from finishing the translation
as quickly as we all desired, we gladly accepted Dr. Aveling's offer to
undertake a portion of the work; at the same time Mrs. Aveling, Marx's
youngest daughter, offered to check the quotations and to restore the
original text of the numerous passages taken from English authors and
Blue books and translated by Marx into German. This has been done
throughout, with but a few unavoidable exceptions.

The following portions of the book have been translated by Dr. Aveling:
(I) Chapters X. (The Working day), and XI. (Rate and Mass of Surplus
value); (2) Part VI. (Wages, comprising Chapters XIX. to XXII.); (3)
from Chapter XXIV., Section 4 (Circumstances that &c.) to the end of
the book, comprising the latter part of Chapter XXIV.,. Chapter XXV.,
and the whole of Part VIII. (Chapters XXVI. to XXXIII); (4) the two
Author's prefaces. All the rest of the book has been done by Mr. Moore.
While, thus, each of the translators is responsible for his share of
the work only, I bear a joint responsibility for the whole.

The third German edition, which has been made the basis of our work
throughout, was prepared by me, in 1883, with the assistance of notes
left by the author, indicating the passages of the second edition to be
replaced by designated passages, from the French text published in
1873. The alterations thus effected in the text of the second edition
generally coincided with changes prescribed by Marx in a set of MS.
instructions for an English translation that was planned, about ten
years ago, in America, but abandoned chiefly for want of a fit and
proper translator. This MS. was placed at our disposal by our old
friend Mr. F. A. Sorge of Hoboken N. J. It designates some further
interpolations from the French edition; but, being so many years older
than the final instructions for the third edition, I did not consider
myself at liberty to make use of it otherwise than sparingly, and
chiefly in cases where it helped us over difficulties. In the same way,
the French text has been referred to in most of the difficult passages,
as an indicator of what the author himself was prepared to sacrifice
wherever something of the full import of the original had to be
sacrificed in the rendering.

There is, however, one difficulty we could not spare the reader: the
use of certain terms in a sense different from what they have, not only
in common life, but in ordinary Political Economy. But this was
unavoidable. Every new aspect of a science involves a revolution in the
technical terms of that science. This is best shown by chemistry, where
the whole of the terminology is radically changed about once in twenty
years, and where you will hardly find a single organic compound that
has not gone through a whole series of different names. Political
Economy has generally been content to take, just as they were, the
terms of commercial and industrial life, and to operate with them,
entirely failing to see that by so doing, it confined itself within the
narrow circle of ideas expressed by those terms. Thus, though perfectly
aware that both profits and rent are but sub-divisions, fragments of
that unpaid part of the product which the labourer has to supply to his
employer (its first appropriator, though not its ultimate exclusive
owner), yet even classical Political Economy never went beyond the
received notions of profits and rents, never examined this unpaid part
of the product (called by Marx surplus-product) in its integrity as a
whole, and therefore never arrived at a clear comprehension, either of
its origin and nature, or of the laws that regulate the subsequent
distribution of its value. Similarly all industry, not agricultural or
handicraft, is indiscriminately comprised in the term of manufacture,
and thereby the distinction is obliterated between two great and
essentially different periods of economic history: the period of
manufacture proper, based on the division of manual labour, and the
period of modern industry based on machinery. It is, however, self-
evident that a theory which views modern capitalist production as a
mere passing stage in the economic history of mankind, must make use of
terms different from those habitual to writers who look upon that form
of production as imperishable and final.

A word respecting the author's method of quoting may not be out of
place. In the majority of cases, the quotations serve, in the usual
way, as documentary evidence in support of assertions made in the text.
But in many instances, passages from economic writers are quoted in
order to indicate when, where, and by whom a certain proposition was
for the first time clearly enunciated. This is done in cases where the
proposition quoted is of importance as being a more or less adequate
expression of the conditions of social production and exchange
prevalent at the time, and quite irrespective of Marx's recognition, or
otherwise, of its general validity. These quotations, therefore,
supplement the text by a running commentary taken from the history of
the science.

Our translation comprises the first book of the work only. But this
first book is in a great measure a whole in itself, and has for twenty
years ranked as an independent work. The second book, edited in German
by me, in 1885, is decidedly incomplete without the third, which cannot
be published before the end of 1887. When Book III. has been brought
out in the original German, it will then be soon enough to think about
preparing an English edition of both.

'Das Kapital' is often called, on the Continent, 'the Bible of the
working class.' That the conclusions arrived at in this work are daily
more and more becoming the fundamental principles of the great working-
class movement, not only in Germany and Switzerland, but in France, in
Holland and Belgium, in America, and even in Italy and Spain, that
everywhere the working class more and more recognises, in these
conclusions, the most adequate expression of its condition and of its
aspirations, nobody acquainted with that movement will deny. And in
England, too, the theories of Marx, even at this moment, exercise a
powerful influence upon the socialist movement which is spreading in
the ranks of 'cultured' people no less than in those of the working
class. But that is not all. The time is rapidly approaching when a
thorough examination of England's economic position will impose itself
as an irresistible national necessity. The working of the industrial
system of this country, impossible without a constant and rapid
extension of production, and therefore of markets, is coming to a dead
stop.

Free Trade has exhausted its resources; even Manchester doubts this its
quondam economic gospel. Foreign industry, rapidly developing, stares
English production in the face everywhere, not only in protected, but
also in neutral markets, and even on this side of the Channel. While
the productive power increases in a geometric, the extension of markets
proceeds at best in an arithmetic ratio. The decennial cycle of
stagnation, prosperity, over-production and crisis, ever recurrent from
1825 to 1867, seems indeed to have run its course; but only to land us
in the slough of despond of a permanent and chronic depression. The
sighed for period of prosperity will not come; as often as we seem to
perceive its heralding symptoms, so often do they again vanish into
air. Meanwhile, each succeeding winter brings up afresh the great
question, 'what to do with the unemployed"; but while the number of the
unemployed keeps swelling from year to year, there is nobody to answer
that question; and we can almost calculate the moment when the
unemployed losing patience will take their own fate into their own
hands. Surely, at such a moment, the voice ought to be heard of a man
whose whole theory is the result of a lifelong study of the economic
history and condition of England, and whom that study led to the
conclusion that, at least in Europe, England is the only country where
the inevitable social revolution might be effected entirely by peaceful
and legal means. He certainly never forgot to add that he hardly
expected the English ruling classes to submit, without a 'pro-slavery
rebellion,' to this peaceful and legal revolution.


== Preface to the Fourth German Edition(Engels, 1890) = =

The fourth edition required that I should establish in final form, as
nearly as possible, both text and footnotes. The following brief
explanation will show how I have fulfilled this task.


After again comparing the French edition and Marx's manuscript remarks
I have made some further additions to the German text from that
translation. They will be found on p. 80 (3rd edition, p. 88) , pp.
458-60 (3rd edition, pp. 509-10) , pp. 547-51 (3rd edition, p. 600) ,
pp. 591-93 (3rd edition, p. 644) and p. 596 (3rd edition, p. 648) in
Note 1. I have also followed the example of the French and English
editions by putting the long footnote on the miners into the text (3rd
edition, pp. 509- 15; 4th edition, pp. 461-67) . Other small
alterations are of a purely technical nature.


Further, I have added a few more explanatory notes, especially where
changed historical conditions seemed to demand this. All these
additional notes are enclosed in square brackets and marked either with
my initials or 'D. H.'

Meanwhile a complete revision of the numerous quotations had been made
necessary by the publication of the English edition. For this edition
Marx's youngest daughter, Eleanor, undertook to compare all the
quotations with their originals, so that those taken from English
sources, which constitute the vast majority, are given there not as
re-translations from the German but in the original English form In
preparing the fourth edition it was therefore incumbent upon me to
consult this text. The comparison revealed various small inaccuracies.
Page numbers wrongly indicated, due partly to mistakes in copying from
notebooks, and partly to the accumulated misprints of three editions;
misplaced quotation or omission marks, which cannot be avoided when a
mass of quotations is copied from note-book extracts; here and there
some rather unhappy translation of a word; particular passages quoted
from the old Paris notebooks of 1843-45, when Marx did not know English
and was reading English economists in French translations, so that the
double translation yielded a slightly different shade of meaning, e.g.,
in the case of Steuart, Ure, etc., where the English text had now to be
used -- and other similar instances of trifling inaccuracy or
negligence. But anyone who compares the fourth edition with the
previous ones can convince himself that all this laborious process of
emendation has not produced the smallest change in the book worth
speaking of. There was only one quotation which could not be traced --
the one from Richard Jones (4th edition, p. 562, note 47). Marx
probably slipped up when writing down the title of the book. All the
other quotations retain their cogency in full, or have enhanced it due
to their present exact form.

Here, however, I am obliged to revert to an old story.

I know of only one case in which the accuracy of a quotation given by
Marx has been called in question. But as the issue dragged beyond his
lifetime I cannot well ignore it here.

On March 7, 1872, there appeared in the Berlin Concordia, organ of the
German Manufacturers' Association, an anonymous article entitled: 'How
Karl Marx Quotes.' It was here asserted, with an effervescence of moral
indignation and unparliamentary language, that the quotation from
Gladstone's Budget Speech of April 16, 1863 (in the Inaugural Address
of the International Workingmen's Association, 1864, and repeated in
'Capital,' Vol. I, p. 617, 4th edition; p. 671, 3rd edition) , had been
falsified; that not a single word of the sentence: 'this intoxicating
augmentation of wealth and power ... is ... entirely confined to
classes of property' was to be found in the (semi-official)
stenographic report in Hansard. 'But this sentence is nowhere to be
found in Gladstone's speech. Exactly the opposite is stated there.' (In
bold type): 'This sentence, both in form and substance, is a lie
inserted by Marx."


Marx, to whom the number of Concordia was sent the following May,
answered the anonymous author in the "Volksstaat" of June 1st. As he
could not recall which newspaper report he had used for the quotation,
he limited himself to citing, first the equivalent quotation from two
English publications, and then the report in The Times, according to
which Gladstone says:

'That is the state of the case as regards the wealth of this country. I
must say for one, I should look almost with apprehension and with pain
upon this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power, if it were my
belief that it was confined to classes who are in easy circumstances.
This takes no cognisance at all of the condition of the labouring
population. The augmentation I have described and which is founded, I
think, upon accurate returns, is an augmentation entirely confined to
classes possessed of property.'


Thus Gladstone says here that he would be sorry if it were so, but it
is so: this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power is entirely
confined to classes of property. And as to the semi-official Hansard,
Marx goes on to say: 'In the version which he afterwards manipulated ,
Mr. Gladstone was astute enough to obliterate this passage, which,
coming from an English Chancellor of the Exchequer, was certainly
compromising. This, by the way, is a traditional usage in the English
parliament and not an invention gotten up by little Lasker against
Bebel.'


The anonymous writer gets angrier and angrier. In his answer in
Concordia, July 4th, he sweeps aside second-hand sources and demurely
suggests that it is the 'custom' to quote parliamentary speeches from
the stenographic report; adding, however, that The Times report (which
includes the 'falsified' sentence) and the Hansard report (which omits
it) are 'substantially in complete agreement,' while The Times report
likewise contains 'the exact opposite to that notorious passage in the
Inaugural Address.' This fellow carefully conceals the fact that The
Times report explicitly includes that self-same 'notorious passage,'
alongside of its alleged 'opposite.' Despite all this, however, the
anonymous one feels that he is stuck fast and that only some new dodge
can save him. Thus, whilst his article bristles, as we have just shown,
with 'impudent mendacity' and is interlarded with such edifying terms
of abuse as 'bad faith,' 'dishonesty,' 'lying allegation,' 'that
spurious quotation,' 'impudent mendacity,' 'a quotation entirely
falsified,' 'this falsification,' 'simply infamous,' etc., he finds it
necessary to divert the issue to another domain and therefore promises
'to explain in a second article the meaning which we (the
non-mendacious anonymous one) attribute to the content of Gladstone's
words.' As if his particular opinion, of no decisive value as it is,
had anything whatever to do with the matter. This second article was
printed in Concordia on July 11th.

Marx replied again in the "Volksstaat" of August 7th now giving also
the reports of the passage in question from the Morning Star and the
Morning Advertiser of April 17, 1863. According to both reports
Gladstone said that he would look with apprehension, etc., upon this
intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power if he believed it to be
confined to 'classes in easy circumstances.' But this augmentation was
in fact 'entirely confined to classes possessed of property.' So these
reports too reproduced word for word the sentence alleged to have been
'lyingly inserted.' Marx further established once more, by a comparison
of The Times and the Hansard texts, that this sentence, which three
newspaper reports of identical content, appearing independently of one
another the next morning, proved to have been really uttered, was
missing from the Hansard report, revised according to the familiar
'custom,' and that Gladstone, to use Marx's words, 'had afterwards
conjured it away.' In conclusion Marx stated that he had no time for
further intercourse with the anonymous one. The latter also seems to
have had enough, at any rate Marx received no further issues of
Concordia.

With this the matter appeared to be dead and buried. True, once or
twice later on there reached us, from persons in touch with the
University of Cambridge, mysterious rumours of an unspeakable literary
crime which Marx was supposed to have committed in 'Capital,' but
despite all investigation nothing more definite could be learned. Then,
on November 29, 1883, eight months after Marx's death, there appeared
in The Times a letter headed Trinity College, Cambridge, and signed
Sedley Taylor, in which this little man, who dabbles in the mildest
sort of co-operative affairs, seizing upon some chance pretext or
other, at last enlightened us, not only concerning those vague
Cambridge rumours, but also the anonymous one in Concordia.


'What appears extremely singular,' says the little man from Trinity
College, 'is that it was reserved for Professor Brentano (then of the
University of Breslau, now of that of Strassburg) to expose... the bad
faith which had manifestly dictated the citation made from Mr.
Gladstone's speech in the Address. Herr Karl Marx, who ... attempted to
defend the citation, had the hardihood, in the deadly shifts to which
Brentano's masterly conduct of the attack speedily reduced him, to
assert that Mr. Gladstone had 'manipulated' the report of his speech in
The Times of April 17, 1863, before it appeared in Hansard, in order to
'obliterate' a passage which 'was certainly compromising' for an
English Chancellor of the Exchequer. On Brentano's showing, by a
detailed comparison of texts, that the reports of The Times and of
Hansard agreed in utterly excluding the meaning which craftily isolated
quotation had put upon Mr. Gladstone's words, Marx withdrew from
further controversy under the plea of 'want of time.''


So that was at the bottom of the whole business! And thus was the
anonymous campaign of Herr Brentano in Concordia gloriously reflected
in the productively co-operating imagination of Cambridge. Thus he
stood, sword in hand, and thus he battled, in his 'masterly conduct of
the attack,' this St. George of the German Manufacturers' Association,
whilst the infernal dragon Marx, 'in deadly shifts,' 'speedily'
breathed his last at his feet.

All this Ariostian battle scene, however, only serves to conceal the
dodges of our St. George. Here there is no longer talk of 'lying
insertion' or 'falsification,' but of 'craftily isolated quotation.'
The whole issue was shifted, and St. George and his Cambridge squire
very well knew why.

Eleanor Marx replied in the monthly journal To-day (February 1884), as
The Times refused to publish her letter. She once more focussed the
debate on the sole question at issue: had Marx 'lyingly inserted' that
sentence or not? To this Mr. Sedley Taylor answered that 'the question
whether a particular sentence did or did not occur in Mr. Gladstone's
speech' had been, in his opinion, 'of very subordinate importance' in
the Brentano-Marx controversy, 'compared to the issue whether the
quotation in dispute was made with the intention of conveying, or of
perverting Mr. Gladstone's meaning.' He then admits that The Times
report contains 'a verbal contrariety"; but, if the context is rightly
interpreted, i.e., in the Gladstonian Liberal sense, it shows what Mr.
Gladstone meant to say. (To-day, March, 1884.) The most comic point
here is that our little Cambridge man now insists upon quoting the
speech not from Hansard, as, according to the anonymous Brentano, it is
'customary' to do, but from The Times report, which the same Brentano
had characterised as 'necessarily bungling.' Naturally so, for in
Hansard the vexatious sentence is missing.

Eleanor Marx had no difficulty (in the same issue of To-day) in
dissolving all this argumentation into thin air. Either Mr. Taylor had
read the controversy of 1872, in which case he was now making not only
'lying insertions' but also 'lying' suppressions; or he had not read it
and ought to remain silent. In either case it was certain that he did
not dare to maintain for a moment the accusation of his friend Brentano
that Marx had made a 'lying' addition. On the contrary, Marx, it now
seems, had not lyingly added but suppressed an important sentence. But
this same sentence is quoted on page 5 of the Inaugural Address, a few
lines before the alleged 'lying insertion.' And as to the 'contrariety'
in Gladstone's speech, is it not Marx himself, who in 'Capital,' p. 618
(3rd edition, p. 672), note 105 , refers to 'the continual crying
contradictions in Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864"? Only
he does not presume √† la Mr. Sedley Taylor to resolve them into
complacent Liberal sentiments. Eleanor Marx, in concluding her reply,
finally sums up as follows:


'Marx has not suppressed anything worth quoting, neither has he
'lyingly' added anything. But he has restored, rescued from oblivion, a
particular sentence of one of Mr. Gladstone's speeches, a sentence
which had indubitably been pronounced, but which somehow or other had
found its way -- out of Hansard.'

With that Mr. Sedley Taylor too had had enough, and the result of this
whole professorial cobweb, spun out over two decades and two great
countries, is that nobody has since dared to cast any other aspersion
upon Marx's literary honesty; whilst Mr. Sedley Taylor, no doubt, will
hereafter put as little confidence in the literary war bulletins of
Herr Brentano as Herr Brentano will in the papal infallibility of
Hansard.

"Frederick Engels" London. June 25. 1890

= Part 1: Commodities and Money =

== Chapter 1: Commodities = =

=== Section 1: The Two Factors of a Commodity:Use-Value and Value(The
Substance of Value and the Magnitude of Value) == =

The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of
production prevails, presents itself as 'an immense accumulation of
commodities,' its unit being a single commodity. Our investigation must
therefore begin with the analysis of a commodity.

A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that
by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another. The
nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the
stomach or from fancy, makes no difference. Neither are we here
concerned to know how the object satisfies these wants, whether
directly as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production.

Every useful thing, as iron, paper, &c., may be looked at from the two
points of view of quality and quantity. It is an assemblage of many
properties, and may therefore be of use in various ways. To discover
the various uses of things is the work of history. So also is the
establishment of socially-recognized standards of measure for the
quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these measures has
its origin partly in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured,
partly in convention.

The utility of a thing makes it a use value. But this utility is not a
thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of the
commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. A commodity,
such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as it is a
material thing, a use value, something useful. This property of a
commodity is independent of the amount of labour required to
appropriate its useful qualities. When treating of use value, we always
assume to be dealing with definite quantities, such as dozens of
watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The use values of commodities
furnish the material for a special study, that of the commercial
knowledge of commodities. Use values become a reality only by use or
consumption: they also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever
may be the social form of that wealth. In the form of society we are
about to consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of
exchange value.

Exchange value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative
relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are
exchanged for those of another sort, a relation constantly changing
with time and place. Hence exchange value appears to be something
accidental and purely relative, and consequently an intrinsic value,
"i.e.", an exchange value that is inseparably connected with, inherent
in commodities, seems a contradiction in terms. Let us consider the
matter a little more closely.

A given commodity, "e.g.", a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x
blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c. -- in short, for other commodities in
the most different proportions. Instead of one exchange value, the
wheat has, therefore, a great many. But since x blacking, y silk, or z
gold &c., each represents the exchange value of one quarter of wheat, x
blacking, y silk, z gold, &c., must, as exchange values, be replaceable
by each other, or equal to each other. Therefore, first: the valid
exchange values of a given commodity express something equal; secondly,
exchange value, generally, is only the mode of expression, the
phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from
it.

Let us take two commodities, "e.g.", corn and iron. The proportions in
which they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can
always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn
is equated to some quantity of iron: "e.g.", 1 quarter corn = x cwt.
iron. What does this equation tell us? It tells us that in two
different things -- in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt. of iron, there
exists in equal quantities something common to both. The two things
must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is neither the one
nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is exchange value, must
therefore be reducible to this third.

A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In order to
calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose
them into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself is expressed
by something totally different from its visible figure, namely, by half
the product of the base multiplied by the altitude. In the same way the
exchange values of commodities must be capable of being expressed in
terms of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a
greater or less quantity.

This common 'something' cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or
any other natural property of commodities. Such properties claim our
attention only in so far as they affect the utility of those
commodities, make them use values. But the exchange of commodities is
evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from use value.
Then one use value is just as good as another, provided only it be
present in sufficient quantity. Or, as old Barbon says,

'one sort of wares are as good as another, if the values be equal.
There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value ... An
hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one
hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold.'

As use values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but
as exchange values they are merely different quantities, and
consequently do not contain an atom of use value.

If then we leave out of consideration the use value of commodities,
they have only one common property left, that of being products of
labour. But even the product of labour itself has undergone a change in
our hands. If we make abstraction from its use value, we make
abstraction at the same time from the material elements and shapes that
make the product a use value; we see in it no longer a table, a house,
yarn, or any other useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is
put out of sight. Neither can it any longer be regarded as the product
of the labour of the joiner, the mason, the spinner, or of any other
definite kind of productive labour. Along with the useful qualities of
the products themselves, we put out of sight both the useful character
of the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms
of that labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all;
all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour in the
abstract.

Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; it consists
of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere congelation of
homogeneous human labour, of labour power expended without regard to
the mode of its expenditure. All that these things now tell us is, that
human labour power has been expended in their production, that human
labour is embodied in them. When looked at as crystals of this social
substance, common to them all, they are -- Values.

We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their exchange value
manifests itself as something totally independent of their use value.
But if we abstract from their use value, there remains their Value as
defined above. Therefore, the common substance that manifests itself in
the exchange value of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is
their value. The progress of our investigation will show that exchange
value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest
itself or be expressed. For the present, however, we have to consider
the nature of value independently of this, its form.

A use value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human
labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. How,
then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the
quantity of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the
article. The quantity of labour, however, is measured by its duration,
and labour time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and
hours.

Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined
by the quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskilful the
labourer, the more valuable would his commodity be, because more time
would be required in its production. The labour, however, that forms
the substance of value, is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one
uniform labour power. The total labour power of society, which is
embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by
that society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour
power, composed though it be of innumerable individual units. Each of
these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the character of
the average labour power of society, and takes effect as such; that is,
so far as it requires for producing a commodity, no more time than is
needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary. The labour
time socially necessary is that required to produce an article under
the normal conditions of production, and with the average degree of
skill and intensity prevalent at the time. The introduction of
power-looms into England probably reduced by one-half the labour
required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. The hand-loom
weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time as
before; but for all that, the product of one hour of their labour
represented after the change only half an hour's social labour, and
consequently fell to one-half its former value.

We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of
any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, or the labour
time socially necessary for its production. Each individual commodity,
in this connexion, is to be considered as an average sample of its
class.0 Commodities, therefore, in which equal quantities of labour are
embodied, or which can be produced in the same time, have the same
value. The value of one commodity is to the value of any other, as the
labour time necessary for the production of the one is to that
necessary for the production of the other. 'As values, all commodities
are only definite masses of congealed labour time.'1


The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour
time required for its production also remained constant. But the latter
changes with every variation in the productiveness of labour. This
productiveness is determined by various circumstances, amongst others,
by the average amount of skill of the workmen, the state of science,
and the degree of its practical application, the social organisation of
production, the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and
by physical conditions. For example, the same amount of labour in
favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in
unfavourable, only in four. The same labour extracts from rich mines
more metal than from poor mines. Diamonds are of very rare occurrence
on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an average,
a great deal of labour time. Consequently much labour is represented in
a small compass. Jacob doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at
its full value. This applies still more to diamonds. According to
Eschwege, the total produce of the Brazilian diamond mines for the
eighty years, ending in 1823, had not realised the price of
one-and-a-half years' average produce of the sugar and coffee
plantations of the same country, although the diamonds cost much more
labour, and therefore represented more value. With richer mines, the
same quantity of labour would embody itself in more diamonds, and their
value would fall. If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour,
in converting carbon into diamonds, their value might fall below that
of bricks. In general, the greater the productiveness of labour, the
less is the labour time required for the production of an article, the
less is the amount of labour crystallised in that article, and the less
is its value; and "vice vers√¢", the less the productiveness of labour,
the greater is the labour time required for the production of an
article, and the greater is its value. The value of a commodity,
therefore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the
productiveness, of the labour incorporated in it.

The following passage occurred only in the first edition. 'Now we know
the substance of value. It is labour. We know the measure of its
magnitude. It is labour time. The form, which stamps value as
exchange-value, remains to be analysed. But before this we need to
develop the characteristics we have already found somewhat more fully.'
Taken from the Penguin edition of 'Capital,' translated by Ben Fowkes.



A thing can be a use value, without having value. This is the case
whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. Such are air, virgin
soil, natural meadows, &c. A thing can be useful, and the product of
human labour, without being a commodity. Whoever directly satisfies his
wants with the produce of his own labour, creates, indeed, use values,
but not commodities. In order to produce the latter, he must not only
produce use values, but use values for others, social use values. (And
not only for others, without more. The mediaeval peasant produced
quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. But
neither the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by
reason of the fact that they had been produced for others. To become a
commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it will serve
as a use value, by means of an exchange.)2 Lastly nothing can have
value, without being an object of utility. If the thing is useless, so
is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count as labour, and
therefore creates no value.

=== Section 2: The Twofold Character of the Labour Embodied in
Commodities == =

At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two
things -- use value and exchange value. Later on, we saw also that
labour, too, possesses the same twofold nature; for, so far as it finds
expression in value, it does not possess the same characteristics that
belong to it as a creator of use values. I was the first to point out
and to examine critically this twofold nature of the labour contained
in commodities. As this point is the pivot on which a clear
comprehension of political economy turns, we must go more into detail.

Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and
let the former be double the value of the latter, so that, if 10 yards
of linen = W, the coat = 2W.

The coat is a use value that satisfies a particular want. Its existence
is the result of a special sort of productive activity, the nature of
which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, subject, means, and
result. The labour, whose utility is thus represented by the value in
use of its product, or which manifests itself by making its product a
use value, we call useful labour. In this connection we consider only
its useful effect.

As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use values,
so also are the two forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and
weaving. Were these two objects not qualitatively different, not
produced respectively by labour of different quality, they could not
stand to each other in the relation of commodities. Coats are not
exchanged for coats, one use value is not exchanged for another of the
same kind.

To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as
many different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the
order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the social
division of labour. This division of labour is a necessary condition
for the production of commodities, but it does not follow, conversely,
that the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the
division of labour. In the primitive Indian community there is social
division of labour, without production of commodities. Or, to take an
example nearer home, in every factory the labour is divided according
to a system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives
mutually exchanging their individual products. Only such products can
become commodities with regard to each other, as result from different
kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independently and for the
account of private individuals.

To resume, then: In the use value of each commodity there is contained
useful labour, "i.e.", productive activity of a definite kind and
exercised with a definite aim. Use values cannot confront each other as
commodities, unless the useful labour embodied in them is qualitatively
different in each of them. In a community, the produce of which in
general takes the form of commodities, "i.e.", in a community of
commodity producers, this qualitative difference between the useful
forms of labour that are carried on independently by individual
producers, each on their own account, develops into a complex system, a
social division of labour.

Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer, in
either case it operates as a use value. Nor is the relation between the
coat and the labour that produced it altered by the circumstance that
tailoring may have become a special trade, an independent branch of the
social division of labour. Wherever the want of clothing forced them to
it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years, without a
single man becoming a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other
element of material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of
Nature, must invariably owe their existence to a special productive
activity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates
particular nature-given materials to particular human wants. So far
therefore as labour is a creator of use value, is useful labour, it is
a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, for the
existence of the human race; it is an eternal nature-imposed necessity,
without which there can be no material exchanges between man and
Nature, and therefore no life.

The use values, coat, linen, &c., "i.e.", the bodies of commodities,
are combinations of two elements -- matter and labour. If we take away
the useful labour expended upon them, a material substratum is always
left, which is furnished by Nature without the help of man. The latter
can work only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of matter.3
Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by
natural forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of
material wealth, of use values produced by labour. As William Petty
puts it, labour is its father and the earth its mother.

Let us now pass from the commodity considered as a use value to the
value of commodities.

By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the linen. But
this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the present does not
concern us. We bear in mind, however, that if the value of the coat is
double that of 10 yds of linen, 20 yds of linen must have the same
value as one coat. So far as they are values, the coat and the linen
are things of a like substance, objective expressions of essentially
identical labour. But tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively,
different kinds of labour. There are, however, states of society in
which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in
which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the
labour of the same individual, and not special and fixed functions of
different persons, just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and
the trousers which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the
labour of one and the same individual. Moreover, we see at a glance
that, in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in
accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of
tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. This change may possibly
not take place without friction, but take place it must.

Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, viz.,
the useful character of the labour, is nothing but the expenditure of
human labour power. Tailoring and weaving, though qualitatively
different productive activities, are each a productive expenditure of
human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour.
They are but two different modes of expending human labour power. Of
course, this labour power, which remains the same under all its
modifications, must have attained a certain pitch of development before
it can be expended in a multiplicity of modes. But the value of a
commodity represents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of
human labour in general. And just as in society, a general or a banker
plays a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby
part,4 so here with mere human labour. It is the expenditure of simple
labour power, "i.e.", of the labour power which, on an average, apart
from any special development, exists in the organism of every ordinary
individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies in character in
different countries and at different times, but in a particular society
it is given. Skilled labour counts only as simple labour intensified,
or rather, as multiplied simple labour, a given quantity of skilled
being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour.
Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. A
commodity may be the product of the most skilled labour, but its value,
by equating it to the product of simple unskilled labour, represents a
definite quantity of the latter labour alone.5 The different
proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled
labour as their standard, are established by a social process that goes
on behind the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be
fixed by custom. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account
every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by this we do no
more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction.

Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we
abstract from their different use values, so it is with the labour
represented by those values: we disregard the difference between its
useful forms, weaving and tailoring. As the use values, coat and linen,
are combinations of special productive activities with cloth and yarn,
while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other hand, mere
homogeneous congelations of undifferentiated labour, so the labour
embodied in these latter values does not count by virtue of its
productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of
human labour power. Tailoring and weaving are necessary factors in the
creation of the use values, coat and linen, precisely because these two
kinds of labour are of different qualities; but only in so far as
abstraction is made from their special qualities, only in so far as
both possess the same quality of being human labour, do tailoring and
weaving form the substance of the values of the same articles.

Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values of definite
magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat is worth twice as
much as the ten yards of linen. Whence this difference in their values?
It is owing to the fact that the linen contains only half as much
labour as the coat, and consequently, that in the production of the
latter, labour power must have been expended during twice the time
necessary for the production of the former.

While, therefore, with reference to use value, the labour contained in
a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference to value it
counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced to human labour
pure and simple. In the former case, it is a question of How and What,
in the latter of How much? How long a time? Since the magnitude of the
value of a commodity represents only the quantity of labour embodied in
it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions,
must be equal in value.

If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour
required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, the sum of the
values of the coats produced increases with their number. If one coat
represents x days' labour, two coats represent 2x days' labour, and so
on. But assume that the duration of the labour necessary for the
production of a coat becomes doubled or halved. In the first case one
coat is worth as much as two coats were before; in the second case, two
coats are only worth as much as one was before, although in both cases
one coat renders the same service as before, and the useful labour
embodied in it remains of the same quality. But the quantity of labour
spent on its production has altered.

An increase in the quantity of use values is an increase of material
wealth. With two coats two men can be clothed, with one coat only one
man. Nevertheless, an increased quantity of material wealth may
correspond to a simultaneous fall in the magnitude of its value. This
antagonistic movement has its origin in the twofold character of
labour. Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of
some useful concrete form, the efficacy of any special productive
activity during a given time being dependent on its productiveness.
Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less abundant source of
products, in proportion to the rise or fall of its productiveness. On
the other hand, no change in this productiveness affects the labour
represented by value. Since productive power is an attribute of the
concrete useful forms of labour, of course it can no longer have any
bearing on that labour, so soon as we make abstraction from those
concrete useful forms. However then productive power may vary, the same
labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal
amounts of value. But it will yield, during equal periods of time,
different quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power
rise, fewer, if it fall. The same change in productive power, which
increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in consequence, the quantity
of use values produced by that labour, will diminish the total value of
this increased quantity of use values, provided such change shorten the
total labour time necessary for their production; and "vice vers√¢".

On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an expenditure
of human labour power, and in its character of identical abstract human
labour, it creates and forms the value of commodities. On the other
hand, all labour is the expenditure of human labour power in a special
form and with a definite aim, and in this, its character of concrete
useful labour, it produces use values.6


=== Section 3: The Form of Value or Exchange-Value == =

Commodities come into the world in the shape of use values, articles,
or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. This is their plain, homely,
bodily form. They are, however, commodities, only because they are
something twofold, both objects of utility, and, at the same time,
depositories of value. They manifest themselves therefore as
commodities, or have the form of commodities, only in so far as they
have two forms, a physical or natural form, and a value form.

The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect from
Dame Quickly, that we don't know 'where to have it.' The value of
commodities is the very opposite of the coarse materiality of their
substance, not an atom of matter enters into its composition. Turn and
examine a single commodity, by itself, as we will, yet in so far as it
remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it. If,
however, we bear in mind that the value of commodities has a purely
social reality, and that they acquire this reality only in so far as
they are expressions or embodiments of one identical social substance,
viz., human labour, it follows as a matter of course, that value can
only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity.
In fact we started from exchange value, or the exchange relation of
commodities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it.
We must now return to this form under which value first appeared to us.

Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a
value form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with
the varied bodily forms of their use values. I mean their money form.
Here, however, a task is set us, the performance of which has never yet
even been attempted by "bourgeois" economy, the task of tracing the
genesis of this money form, of developing the expression of value
implied in the value relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost
imperceptible outline, to the dazzling money-form. By doing this we
shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented by money.

The simplest value-relation is evidently that of one commodity to some
one other commodity of a different kind. Hence the relation between the
values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest expression of
the value of a single commodity.

==== A. Elementary or Accidental Form Of Value === =

x commodity A = y commodity B, or x commodity A is worth y commodity B.

20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 Yards of linen are worth 1 coat.

===== 1. The two poles of the expression of value. Relative form and
Equivalent form ==== =

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elementary
form. Its analysis, therefore, is our real difficulty.

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and
the coat), evidently play two different parts. The linen expresses its
value in the coat; the coat serves as the material in which that value
is expressed. The former plays an active, the latter a passive, part.
The value of the linen is represented as relative value, or appears in
relative form. The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in
equivalent form.

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately connected,
mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the expression of value;
but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, antagonistic extremes --
"i.e.", poles of the same expression. They are allotted respectively to
the two different commodities brought into relation by that expression.
It is not possible to express the value of linen in linen. 20 yards of
linen = 20 yards of linen is no expression of value. On the contrary,
such an equation merely says that 20 yards of linen are nothing else
than 20 yards of linen, a definite quantity of the use value linen. The
value of the linen can therefore be expressed only relatively --
"i.e.", in some other commodity. The relative form of the value of the
linen presupposes, therefore, the presence of some other commodity --
here the coat -- under the form of an equivalent. On the other hand,
the commodity that figures as the equivalent cannot at the same time
assume the relative form. That second commodity is not the one whose
value is expressed. Its function is merely to serve as the material in
which the value of the first commodity is expressed.

No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of
linen are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation. 1 coat = 20
yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. But, in that
case, I must reverse the equation, in order to express the value of the
coat relatively; and. so soon as I do that the linen becomes the
equivalent instead of the coat. A single commodity cannot, therefore,
simultaneously assume, in the same expression of value, both forms. The
very polarity of these forms makes them mutually exclusive.

Whether, then, a commodity assumes the relative form, or the opposite
equivalent form, depends entirely upon its accidental position in the
expression of value -- that is, upon whether it is the commodity whose
value is being expressed or the commodity in which value is being
expressed.

===== 2. The Relative Form of value ==== =

(a.) The nature and import of this form

In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value of a
commodity lies hidden in the value relation of two commodities, we
must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart from its
quantitative aspect. The usual mode of procedure is generally the
reverse, and in the value relation nothing is seen but the proportion
between definite quantities of two different sorts of commodities that
are considered equal to each other. It is apt to be forgotten that the
magnitudes of different things can be compared quantitatively, only
when those magnitudes are expressed in terms of the same unit. It is
only as expressions of such a unit that they are of the same
denomination, and therefore commensurable.7


Whether 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 20 coats or = x coats -- that
is, whether a given quantity of linen is worth few or many coats, every
such statement implies that the linen and coats, as magnitudes of
value, are expressions of the same unit, things of the same kind. Linen
= coat is the basis of the equation.

But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus assumed, do
not play the same part. It is only the value of the linen that is
expressed. And how? By its reference to the coat as its equivalent, as
something that can be exchanged for it. In this relation the coat is
the mode of existence of value, is value embodied, for only as such is
it the same as the linen. On the other hand, the linen's own value
comes to the front, receives independent expression, for it is only as
being value that it is comparable with the coat as a thing of equal
value, or exchangeable with the coat. To borrow an illustration from
chemistry, butyric acid is a different substance from propyl formate.
Yet both are made up of the same chemical substances, carbon (C),
hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), and that, too, in like proportions --
namely, C 4 H 8 O 2 . If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate,
then, in the first place, propyl formate would be, in this relation,
merely a form of existence of C 4 H 8 O 2

; and in the second place, we should be stating that butyric acid also
consists of C

4 H 8 O 2 . Therefore, by thus equating the two substances, expression
would be given to their chemical composition, while their different
physical forms would be neglected.

If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations of human
labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, to the abstraction,
value; but we ascribe to this value no form apart from their bodily
form. It is otherwise in the value relation of one commodity to
another. Here, the one stands forth in its character of value by reason
of its relation to the other.

By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate the labour
embodied in the former to that in the latter. Now, it is true that the
tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete labour of a different sort
from the weaving which makes the linen. But the act of equating it to
the weaving, reduces the tailoring to that which is really equal in the
two kinds of labour, to their common character of human labour. In this
roundabout way, then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so
far as it weaves value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring,
and, consequently, is abstract human labour. It is the expression of
equivalence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings
into relief the specific character of value-creating labour, and this
it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour embodied
in the different kinds of commodities to their common quality of human
labour in the abstract.8


There is, however, something else required beyond the expression of the
specific character of the labour of which the value of the linen
consists. Human labour power in motion, or human labour, creates value,
but is not itself value. It becomes value only in its congealed state,
when embodied in the form of some object. In order to express the value
of the linen as a congelation of human labour, that value must be
expressed as having objective existence, as being a something
materially different from the linen itself, and yet a something common
to the linen and all other commodities. The problem is already solved.

When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation of value, the
coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, as something of the
same kind, because it is value. In this position it is a thing in which
we see nothing but value, or whose palpable bodily form represents
value. Yet the coat itself, the body of the commodity, coat, is a mere
use value. A coat as such no more tells us it is value, than does the
first piece of linen we take hold of. This shows that when placed in
value-relation to the linen, the coat signifies more than when out of
that relation, just as many a man strutting about in a gorgeous uniform
counts for more than when in mufti.

In the production of the coat, human labour power, in the shape of
tailoring, must have been actually expended. Human labour is therefore
accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is a depository of value,
but though worn to a thread, it does not let this fact show through.
And as equivalent of the linen in the value equation, it exists under
this aspect alone, counts therefore as embodied value, as a body that
is value. A, for instance, cannot be 'your majesty' to B, unless at the
same time majesty in B's eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, what
is more, with every new father of the people, changes its features,
hair, and many other things besides.

Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equivalent of
the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. The value of the
commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the commodity coat,
the value of one by the use value of the other. As a use value, the
linen is something palpably different from the coat; as value, it is
the same as the coat, and now has the appearance of a coat. Thus the
linen acquires a value form different from its physical form. The fact
that it is value, is made manifest by its equality with the coat, just
as the sheep's nature of a Christian is shown in his resemblance to the
Lamb of God.

We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commodities has
already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon as it comes
into communication with another commodity, the coat. Only it betrays
its thoughts in that language with which alone it is familiar, the
language of commodities. In order to tell us that its own value is
created by labour in its abstract character of human labour, it says
that the coat, in so far as it is worth as much as the linen, and
therefore is value, consists of the same labour as the linen. In order
to inform us that its sublime reality as value is not the same as its
buckram body, it says that value has the appearance of a coat, and
consequently that so far as the linen is value, it and the coat are as
like as two peas. We may here remark, that the language of commodities
has, besides Hebrew, many other more or less correct dialects. The
German 'Wertsein,' to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less
striking manner than the Romance verbs 'valere,' 'valer,' 'valoir,'
that the equating of commodity B to commodity A, is commodity A's own
mode of expressing its value. "Paris vaut bien une messe".


   By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our
   equation, the bodily form of commodity B becomes the value form of
   commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a mirror to the
   value of commodity A.9 By putting itself in relation with commodity
   B, as value "in propri√¢ person√¢", as the matter of which human
   labour is made up, the commodity A converts the value in use, B,
   into the substance in which to express its, A's, own value. The
   value of A, thus expressed in the use value of B, has taken the form
   of relative value.
   
(b.) Quantitative determination of Relative value

Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a useful
object of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 lbs of coffee.
And a given quantity of any commodity contains a definite quantity of
human labour. The value form must therefore not only express value
generally, but also value in definite quantity. Therefore, in the value
relation of commodity A to commodity B, of the linen to the coat, not
only is the latter, as value in general, made the equal in quality of
the linen, but a definite quantity of coat (1 coat) is made the
equivalent of a definite quantity (20 yards) of linen.

The equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are
worth one coat, implies that the same quantity of value substance
(congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two commodities have
each cost the same amount of labour of the same quantity of labour
time. But the labour time necessary for the production of 20 yards of
linen or 1 coat varies with every change in the productiveness of
weaving or tailoring. We have now to consider the influence of such
changes on the quantitative aspect of the relative expression of value.

I. Let the value of the linen vary,0 that of the coat remaining
constant. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing
soil, the labour time necessary for the production of the linen be
doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of the
equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, we should have 20 yards of linen
= 2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the labour time
embodied in 20 yards of linen. If, on the other hand, in consequence,
say, of improved looms, this labour time be reduced by one-half, the
value of the linen would fall by one-half. Consequently, we should have
20 yards of linen =  1/2 coat. The relative value of commodity A,
"i.e.", its value expressed in commodity B, rises and falls directly as
the value of A, the value of B being supposed constant.

II. Let the value of the linen remain constant, while the value of the
coat varies. If, under these circumstances, in consequence, for
instance, of a poor crop of wool, the labour time necessary for the
production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 20 yards of
linen = 1 coat, 20 yards of linen =  1/2 coat. If, on the other hand,
the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards of linen = 2
coats. Hence, if the value of commodity A remain constant, its relative
value expressed in commodity B rises and falls inversely as the value
of B.

If we compare the different cases in I and II, we see that the same
change of magnitude in relative value may arise from totally opposite
causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, becomes 20
yards of linen = 2 coats, either, because the value of the linen has
doubled, or because the value of the coat has fallen by one-half; and
it becomes 20 yards of linen =  1/2 coat, either, because the value of
the linen has fallen by one-half, or because the value of the coat has
doubled.

III. Let the quantities of labour time respectively necessary for the
production of the linen and the coat vary simultaneously in the same
direction and in the same proportion. In this case 20 yards of linen
continue equal to 1 coat, however much their values may have altered.
Their change of value is seen as soon as they are compared with a third
commodity, whose value has remained constant. If the values of all
commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion,
their relative values would remain unaltered. Their real change of
value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of
commodities produced in a given time.

IV. The labour time respectively necessary for the production of the
linen and the coat, and therefore the value of these commodities may
simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at unequal rates or in
opposite directions, or in other ways. The effect of all these possible
different variations, on the relative value of a commodity, may be
deduced from the results of I, II, and III.

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither unequivocally
nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, that is, in
the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. The relative
value of a commodity may vary, although its value remains constant. Its
relative value may remain constant, although its value varies; and
finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that
of its relative expression by no means necessarily correspond in
amount.1


===== 3. The Equivalent form of value ==== =

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in
the use value of a commodity differing in kind (the coat), at the same
time impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely that of
the equivalent. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a
value by the fact that the coat, without having assumed a value form
different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The fact that
the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat
is directly exchangeable with it. Therefore, when we say that a
commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is
directly exchangeable with other commodities.

When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent of
another, such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the
characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, we
are far from knowing in what proportion the two are exchangeable. The
value of the linen being given in magnitude, that proportion depends on
the value of the coat. Whether the coat serves as the equivalent and
the linen as relative value, or the linen as the equivalent and the
coat as relative value, the magnitude of the coat's value is
determined, independently of its value form, by the labour time
necessary for its production. But whenever the coat assumes in the
equation of value, the position of equivalent, its value acquires no
quantitative expression; on the contrary, the commodity coat now
figures only as a definite quantity of some article.

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth -- what? 2 coats. Because the
commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, because the use-value
coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of value,
therefore a definite number of coats suffices to express the definite
quantity of value in the linen. Two coats may therefore express the
quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express the
quantity of their own value. A superficial observation of this fact,
namely, that in the equation of value, the equivalent figures
exclusively as a simple quantity of some article, of some use value,
has misled Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into
seeing, in the expression of value, merely a quantitative relation. The
truth being, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative
determination of its value is expressed.

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the
equivalent, is this: use value becomes the form of manifestation, the
phenomenal form of its opposite, value.

The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value form. But, mark
well, that this "quid pro quo" exists in the case of any commodity B,
only when some other commodity A enters into a value relation with it,
and then only within the limits of this relation. Since no commodity
can stand in the relation of equivalent to itself, and thus turn its
own bodily shape into the expression of its own value, every commodity
is compelled to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to
accept the use value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other
commodity as the form of its own value.

One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material
substances, as use values, will serve to illustrate this point. A
sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can
neither see nor touch this weight. We then take various pieces of iron,
whose weight has been determined beforehand. The iron, as iron, is no
more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf.
Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar-loaf as so much weight, we
put it into a weight-relation with the iron. In this relation, the iron
officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. A certain
quantity of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the
sugar, and represents, in relation to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied,
the form of manifestation of weight. This part is played by the iron
only within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body,
whose weight has to be determined, enters with the iron. Were they not
both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could
therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other. When
we throw both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they
are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper
proportions, they have the same weight. Just as the substance iron, as
a measure of weight, represents in relation to the sugar-loaf weight
alone, so, in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in
relation to the linen, represents value alone.

Here, however, the analogy ceases. The iron, in the expression of the
weight of the sugar-loaf, represents a natural property common to both
bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the expression of value
of the linen, represents a non-natural property of both, something
purely social, namely, their value.

Since the relative form of value of a commodity -- the linen, for
example -- expresses the value of that commodity, as being something
wholly different from its substance and properties, as being, for
instance, coat-like, we see that this expression itself indicates that
some social relation lies at the bottom of it. With the equivalent form
it is just the contrary. The very essence of this form is that the
material commodity itself -- the coat -- just as it is, expresses
value, and is endowed with the form of value by Nature itself. Of
course this holds good only so long as the value relation exists, in
which the coat stands in the position of equivalent to the linen.2
Since, however, the properties of a thing are not the result of its
relations to other things, but only manifest themselves in such
relations, the coat seems to be endowed with its equivalent form, its
property of being directly exchangeable, just as much by Nature as it
is endowed with the property of being heavy, or the capacity to keep us
warm. Hence the enigmatical character of the equivalent form which
escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this
form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money. He
then seeks to explain away the mystical character of gold and silver,
by substituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting,
with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible
commodities which at one time or another have played the part of
equivalent. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple
expression of value, such as 20 yds of linen = 1 coat, already
propounds the riddle of the equivalent form for our solution.

The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the
materialisation of human labour in the abstract, and is at the same
time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour. This
concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract
human labour. If on the one hand the coat ranks as nothing but the
embodiment of abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the
tailoring which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the
form under which that abstract labour is realised. In the expression of
value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring consists, not in
making clothes, but in making an object, which we at once recognise to
be Value, and therefore to be a congelation of labour, but of labour
indistinguishable from that realised in the value of the linen. In
order to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must
reflect nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour
generally.

In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour power is expended.
Both, therefore, possess the general property of being human labour,
and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of
value, have to be considered under this aspect alone. There is nothing
mysterious in this. But in the expression of value there is a complete
turn of the tables. For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that
weaving creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being weaving,
as such, but by reason of its general property of being human labour?
Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete
labour (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of
the product of weaving. Just as the coat in its bodily form became a
direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of
labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human labour
generally.

Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that concrete
labour becomes the form under which its opposite, abstract human
labour, manifests itself.

But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and
is directly identified with, undifferentiated human labour, it also
ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with
that embodied in the linen. Consequently, although, like all other
commodity-producing labour, it is the labour of private individuals,
yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its
character. This is the reason why it results in a product directly
exchangeable with other commodities. We have then a third peculiarity
of the equivalent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals
takes the form of its opposite, labour directly social in its form.

The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will become more
intelligible if we go back to the great thinker who was the first to
analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, or Nature, and
amongst them also the form of value. I mean Aristotle.

In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money form of
commodities is only the further development of the simple form of value
-- "i.e.", of the expression of the value of one commodity in some
other commodity taken at random; for he says:

5 beds = 1 house --
(ÔÅ£ÔÅ¨ÔÅ©ÔÅÆÔÅ°ÔÅ©ÔÄ†ÔÅ∞ÔÅ•ÔÅÆÔÅ¥ÔÅ•ÔÄ†ÔÅ°ÔÅÆÔÅ¥ÔÅ©ÔÄ†ÔÅØÔÅ©ÔÅ£ÔÅ©ÔÅ°œÇ)



is not to be distinguished from

5 beds = so much money. --
(ÔÅ£ÔÅ¨ÔÅ©ÔÅÆÔÅ°ÔÅ©ÔÄ†ÔÅ∞ÔÅ•ÔÅÆÔÅ¥ÔÅ•ÔÄ†ÔÅ°ÔÅÆÔÅ¥ÔÅ©ÔÄ†ÔÄÆÔÄÆÔÄÆÔÄ†ÔÅØÔÅ≥ÔÅØÔÅÆÔÄ†ÔÅ°ÔÅ©ÔÄ†ÔÅ∞ÔÅ•ÔÅÆÔÅ¥ÔÅ•ÔÄ†ÔÅ£ÔÅ¨ÔÅ©ÔÅÆÔÅ°ÔÅ©)



He further sees that the value relation which gives rise to this
expression makes it necessary that the house should qualitatively be
made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation,
these two clearly different things could not be compared with each
other as commensurable quantities. 'Exchange,' he says, 'cannot take
place without equality, and equality not without commensurability".
(ÔÅØÔÅµÔÅ¥ÔÄ†ÔÅ©ÔÅ≥ÔÅØÔÅ¥ÔÅ®œÇÔÄ†ÔÅ≠ÔÅ®ÔÄ†ÔÅØÔÅµÔÅ≥ÔÅ®œÇÔÄ†ÔÅ≥ÔÅÆÔÅ≠ÔÅ≠ÔÅ•ÔÅ¥ÔÅ≤ÔÅ©ÔÅ°œÇ).
 Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further analysis
of the form of value. 'It is, however, in reality, impossible
(ÔÅ¥ÔÅ®ÔÄ†ÔÅ≠ÔÅ•ÔÅÆÔÄ†ÔÅØÔÅµÔÅÆÔÄ†ÔÅ°ÔÅ¨ÔÅ®ÔÅ±ÔÅ•ÔÅ©ÔÅ°ÔÄ†ÔÅ°ÔÅ§ÔÅµÔÅÆÔÅ°ÔÅ¥ÔÅØÔÅÆ),
 that such unlike things can be commensurable' -- "i.e.", qualitatively
equal. Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to their real
nature, consequently only 'a makeshift for practical purposes.'

Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us what barred the way to his
further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. What is
that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value
of the beds being expressed by a house? Such a thing, in truth, cannot
exist, says Aristotle. And why not? Compared with the beds, the house
does represent something equal to them, in so far as it represents what
is really equal, both in the beds and the house. And that is -- human
labour.

There was, however, an important fact which prevented Aristotle from
seeing that, to attribute value to commodities, is merely a mode of
expressing all labour as equal human labour, and consequently as labour
of equal quality. Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had,
therefore, for its natural basis, the inequality of men and of their
labour powers. The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all
kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they
are human labour in general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of
human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice.
This, however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of
the produce of labour takes the form of commodities, in which,
consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, is that of
owners of commodities. The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by
this alone, that he discovered, in the expression of the value of
commodities, a relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the
society in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what,
'in truth,' was at the bottom of this equality.

===== 4. The Elementary Form of value considered as a whole ==== =

The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the
equation, expressing its value relation to another commodity of a
different kind, or in its exchange relation to the same. The value of
commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the fact that commodity B
is directly exchangeable with it. Its value is quantitatively expressed
by the fact, that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a
definite quantity of A. In other words, the value of a commodity
obtains independent and definite expression, by taking the form of
exchange value. When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in
common parlance, that a commodity is both a use value and an exchange
value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. A commodity is a use value
or object of utility, and a value. It manifests itself as this twofold
thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form --
viz., the form of exchange value. It never assumes this form when
isolated, but only when placed in a value or exchange relation with
another commodity of a different kind. When once we know this, such a
mode of expression does no harm; it simply serves as an abbreviation.

Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the value of a
commodity originates in the nature of value, and not that value and its
magnitude originate in the mode of their expression as exchange value.
This, however, is the delusion as well of the mercantilists and their
recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh,3 and others, as also of their
antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade, such as Bastiat. The
mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the
expression of value, and consequently on the equivalent form of
commodities, which attains its full perfection in money. The modern
hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price,
on the other hand, lay most stress on the quantitative aspect of the
relative form of value. For them there consequently exists neither
value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by
means of the exchange relation of commodities, that is, in the daily
list of prices current. Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up
the confused ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a
successful cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the
enlightened Free-trade bagmen.

A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms of B,
contained in the equation expressing the value relation of A to B, has
shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form of A figures only
as a use value, the bodily form of B only as the form or aspect of
value. The opposition or contrast existing internally in each commodity
between use value and value, is, therefore, made evident externally by
two commodities being placed in such relation to each other, that the
commodity whose value it is sought to express, figures directly as a
mere use value, while the commodity in which that value is to be
expressed, figures directly as mere exchange value. Hence the
elementary form of value of a commodity is the elementary form in which
the contrast contained in that commodity, between use value and value,
becomes apparent.

Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use value; but
it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's development
that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the
labour spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as
one of the objective qualities of that article, "i.e.", as its value.
It therefore follows that the elementary value form is also the
primitive form under which a product of labour appears historically as
a commodity, and that the gradual transformation of such products into
commodities, proceeds "pari passu" with the development of the value
form.

We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of
value: it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series of metamorphoses
before it can ripen into the price form.

The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any other
commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the use value of A,
and therefore places A merely in a relation of exchange with a single
different commodity, B; but it is still far from expressing A's
qualitative equality, and quantitative proportionality, to all
commodities. To the elementary relative value form of a commodity,
there corresponds the single equivalent form of one other commodity.
Thus, in the relative expression of value of the linen, the coat
assumes the form of equivalent, or of being directly exchangeable, only
in relation to a single commodity, the linen.

Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transition
into a more complete form. It is true that by means of the elementary
form, the value of a commodity A, becomes expressed in terms of one,
and only one, other commodity. But that one may be a commodity of any
kind, coat, iron, corn, or anything else. Therefore, according as A is
placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and the same
commodity, different elementary expressions of value.4 The number of
such possible expressions is limited only by the number of the
different kinds of commodities distinct from it. The isolated
expression of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series,
prolonged to any length, of the different elementary expressions of
that value.

==== B. Total or Expanded Form of value === =


z Com. A = u Com. B or v Com. C or = w Com. D or = Com. E or = &c.(20
yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs tea or = 40 lbs. coffee or = 1
quarter corn or = 2 ounces gold or =  1/2 ton iron or = &c.)



===== 1. The Expanded Relative form of value ==== =

The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now
expressed in terms of numberless other elements of the world of
commodities. Every other commodity now becomes a mirror of the linen's
value.5 It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in
its true light as a congelation of undifferentiated human labour. For
the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour
that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter
what its form, whether tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c., and no
matter, therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or
gold. The linen, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a
social relation, no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but
with the whole world of commodities. As a commodity, it is a citizen of
that world. At the same time, the interminable series of value
equations implies, that as regards the value of a commodity, it is a
matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, of use
value it appears.

In the first form, 20 yds of linen = 1 coat, it might, for ought that
otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two commodities are
exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second form, on the
contrary, we perceive at once the background that determines, and is
essentially different from, this accidental appearance. The value of
the linen remains unaltered in magnitude, whether expressed in coats,
coffee, or iron, or in numberless different commodities, the property
of as many different owners. The accidental relation between two
individual commodity-owners disappears. It becomes plain, that it is
not the exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their
value; but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value
which controls their exchange proportions.

===== 2. The particular Equivalent form ==== =

Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c., figures in the
expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, consequently,
as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each of these commodities
figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many. In the
same way the manifold concrete useful kinds of labour, embodied in
these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of the
realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour.

===== 3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value ==== =

In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete
because the series representing it is interminable. The chain of which
each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment to be
lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into existence and
furnishes the material for a fresh expression of value. In the second
place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent
expressions of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative
value of each commodity in turn, becomes expressed in this expanded
form, we get for each of them a relative value form, different in every
case, and consisting of an interminable series of expressions of value.
The defects of the expanded relative value form are reflected in the
corresponding equivalent form. Since the bodily form of each single
commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst numberless others,
we have, on the whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each
excluding the others. In the same way, also, the special, concrete,
useful kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is
presented only as a particular kind of labour, and therefore not as an
exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The latter,
indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its manifold,
particular, concrete forms. But, in that case, its expression in an
infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity.

The expanded relative value form is, however, nothing but the sum of
the elementary relative expressions or equations of the first kind,
such as:

20 yards of linen = 1 coat20 yards of linen = 10 lbs of tea, etc.

Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation,

1 coat = 20 yards of linen 10 lbs of tea = 20 yards of linen, etc.

In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other commodities,
and thus expresses its value in a series of other commodities, it
necessarily follows, that the various owners of the latter exchange
them for the linen, and consequently express the value of their various
commodities in one and the same third commodity, the linen. If then, we
reverse the series, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs of tea,
etc., that is to say, if we give expression to the converse relation
already implied in the series, we get,

==== C. The General Form of Value === =





| style="border:none;padding:0cm;"| &nbsp; |
style="border:none;padding:0cm;"| &nbsp; &nbsp; = 20 yards of linen

|} ===== 1. The altered character of the form of value ==== =

All commodities now express their value (1) in an elementary form,
because in a single commodity; (2) with unity, because in one and the
same commodity. This form of value is elementary and the same for all,
therefore general.

The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a commodity as
something distinct from its use value or material form.

The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following: -- 1 coat
= 20 yards of linen, 10 lbs of tea =  1/2 a ton of iron. The value of
the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. But to be
equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are linen
and iron. This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the first
beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodities
by accidental and occasional exchanges.

The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner than the
first, the value of a commodity from its use value, for the value of
the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible shapes with the
bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to iron, to tea, in
short, to everything else, only not to itself, the coat. On the other
hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly
excluded; for, in the equation of value of each commodity, all other
commodities now appear only under the form of equivalents. The expanded
form of value comes into actual existence for the first time so soon as
a particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer
exceptionally, but habitually, exchanged for various other commodities.

The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of the whole
world of commodities in terms of a single commodity set apart for the
purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents to us their values by
means of their equality with linen. The value of every commodity is
now, by being equated to linen, not only differentiated from its own
use value, but from all other use values generally, and is, by that
very fact, expressed as that which is common to all commodities. By
this form, commodities are, for the first time, effectively brought
into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange
values.

The two earlier forms either express the value of each commodity in
terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in a series of many
such commodities. In both cases, it is, so to say, the special business
of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and this
it does without the help of the others. These others, with respect to
the former, play the passive parts of equivalents. The general form of
value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of
commodities, and from that alone. A commodity can acquire a general
expression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously
with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new
commodity must follow suit. It thus becomes evident that since the
existence of commodities as values is purely social, this social
existence can be expressed by the totality of their social relations
alone, and consequently that the form of their value must be a socially
recognised form.

All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as
qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values whose
magnitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing the magnitudes of
their values in one and the same material, the linen, those magnitudes
are also compared with each other For instance, 10 lbs of tea = 20
yards of linen, and 40 lbs of coffee = 20 yards of linen. Therefore, 10
lbs of tea = 40 lbs of coffee. In other words, there is contained in 1
lb of coffee only one-fourth as much substance of value -- labour -- as
is contained in 1 lb of tea.

The general form of relative value, embracing the whole world of
commodities, converts the single commodity that is excluded from the
rest, and made to play the part of equivalent -- here the linen -- into
the universal equivalent. The bodily form of the linen is now the form
assumed in common by the values of all commodities; it therefore
becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them. The substance
linen becomes the visible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of
every kind of human labour. Weaving, which is the labour of certain
private individuals producing a particular article, linen, acquires in
consequence a social character, the character of equality with all
other kinds of labour. The innumerable equations of which the general
form of value is composed, equate in turn the labour embodied in the
linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert
weaving into the general form of manifestation of undifferentiated
human labour. In this manner the labour realised in the values of
commodities is presented not only under its negative aspect, under
which abstraction is made from every concrete form and useful property
of actual work, but its own positive nature is made to reveal itself
expressly. The general value form is the reduction of all kinds of
actual labour to their common character of being human labour
generally, of being the expenditure of human labour power.

The general value form, which represents all products of labour as mere
congelations of undifferentiated human labour, shows by its very
structure that it is the social resum√© of the world of commodities.
That form consequently makes it indisputably evident that in the world
of commodities the character possessed by all labour of being "human"
labour constitutes its specific social character.

===== 2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value,
and of the Equivalent Form ==== =

The degree of development of the relative form of value corresponds to
that of the equivalent form. But we must bear in mind that the
development of the latter is only the expression and result of the
development of the former.

The primary or isolated relative form of value of one commodity
converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent. The expanded
form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one
commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other
commodities with the character of particular equivalents differing in
kind. And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the character
of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the
material in which they uniformly express their value.

The antagonism between the relative form of value and the equivalent
form, the two poles of the value form, is developed concurrently with
that form itself.

The first form, 20 yds of linen = one coat, already contains this
antagonism, without as yet fixing it. According as we read this
equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the
coat are different. In the one case the relative value of the linen is
expressed in the coat, in the other case the relative value of the coat
is expressed in the linen. In this first form of value, therefore, it
is difficult to grasp the polar contrast.

Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can completely
expand its relative value, and that it acquires this expanded form only
because, and in so far as, all other commodities are, with respect to
it, equivalents. Here we cannot reverse the equation, as we can the
equation 20 yds of linen = 1 coat, without altering its general
character, and converting it from the expanded form of value into the
general form of value.

Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a general social
relative form of value, because, and in so far as, thereby all
commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded from the
equivalent form. A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to
have acquired the character of direct exchangeability with every other
commodity because, and in so far as, this character is denied to every
other commodity.6


The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other
hand, excluded from the relative value form. If the linen, or any other
commodity serving as universal equivalent, were, at the same time, to
share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own
equivalent. We should then have 20 yds of linen = 20 yds of linen; this
tautology expresses neither value, nor magnitude of value. In order to
express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather
reverse the form C. This equivalent has no relative form of value in
common with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed by
a never ending series of other commodities. Thus, the expanded form of
relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of
relative value for the equivalent commodity.

===== 3. Transition from the General form of value to the Money form
==== =

The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. It can,
therefore, be assumed by any commodity. On the other hand, if a
commodity be found to have assumed the universal equivalent form (form
C), this is only because and in so far as it has been excluded from the
rest of all other commodities as their equivalent, and that by their
own act. And from the moment that this exclusion becomes finally
restricted to one particular commodity, from that moment only, the
general form of relative value of the world of commodities obtains real
consistence and general social validity.

The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equivalent form is
thus socially identified, now becomes the money commodity, or serves as
money. It becomes the special social function of that commodity, and
consequently its social monopoly, to play within the world of
commodities the part of the universal equivalent. Amongst the
commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of the
linen, and, in form C, express in common their relative values in
linen, this foremost place has been attained by one in particular --
namely, gold. If, then, in form C we replace the linen by gold, we get,

==== D. The Money-Form === =





| style="border:none;padding:0cm;"| &nbsp; |
style="border:none;padding:0cm;"| &nbsp; &nbsp; = 2 ounces of gold

|} In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the
changes are fundamental. On the other hand, there is no difference
between forms C and D, except that, in the latter, gold has assumed the
equivalent form in the place of linen. Gold is in form D, what linen
was in form C -- the universal equivalent. The progress consists in
this alone, that the character of direct and universal exchangeability
-- in other words, that the universal equivalent form -- has now, by
social custom, become finally identified with the substance, gold.

Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities only because
it was previously, with reference to them, a simple commodity. Like all
other commodities, it was also capable of serving as an equivalent,
either as simple equivalent in isolated exchanges, or as particular
equivalent by the side of others. Gradually it began to serve, within
varying limits, as universal equivalent. So soon as it monopolises this
position in the expression of value for the world of commodities, it
becomes the money commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D
become distinct from form C, and the general form of value become
changed into the money form.

The elementary expression of the relative value of a single commodity,
such as linen, in terms of the commodity, such as gold, that plays the
part of money, is the price form of that commodity. The price form of
the linen is therefore


20 yards of linen = 2 ounces of gold, or, if 2 ounces of gold when
coined are Pounds 2, 20 yards of linen = Pounds 2.


The difficulty in forming a concept of the money form, consists in
clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, and as a necessary
corollary, the general form of value, form C. The latter is deducible
from form B, the expanded form of value, the essential component
element of which, we saw, is form A, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or x
commodity A = y commodity B. The simple commodity form is therefore the
germ of the money form.

=== Section 4: The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof == =

A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily
understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer
thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties.
So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it,
whether we consider it from the point of view that by its properties it
is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those
properties are the product of human labour. It is as clear as noon-day,
that man, by his industry, changes the forms of the materials furnished
by Nature, in such a way as to make them useful to him. The form of
wood, for instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for
all that, the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood.
But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into
something transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the ground,
but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on its head, and
evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful
than 'table-turning' ever was. 6a


The mystical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in
their use value. Just as little does it proceed from the nature of the
determining factors of value. For, in the first place, however varied
the useful kinds of labour, or productive activities, may be, it is a
physiological fact, that they are functions of the human organism, and
that each such function, whatever may be its nature or form, is
essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c.
Secondly, with regard to that which forms the ground-work for the
quantitative determination of value, namely, the duration of that
expenditure, or the quantity of labour, it is quite clear that there is
a palpable difference between its quantity and quality. In all states
of society, the labour time that it costs to produce the means of
subsistence, must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind,
though not of equal interest in different stages of development.7 And
lastly, from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their
labour assumes a social form.

Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of
labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities? Clearly from
this form itself. The equality of all sorts of human labour is
expressed objectively by their products all being equally values; the
measure of the expenditure of labour power by the duration of that
expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of
labour; and finally the mutual relations of the producers, within which
the social character of their labour affirms itself, take the form of a
social relation between the products.

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the
social character of men's labour appears to them as an objective
character stamped upon the product of that labour; because the relation
of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to
them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between
the products of their labour. This is the reason why the products of
labour become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the
same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses. In the same way
the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective
excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of something
outside the eye itself. But, in the act of seeing, there is at all
events, an actual passage of light from one thing to another, from the
external object to the eye. There is a physical relation between
physical things. But it is different with commodities. There, the
existence of the things "qu√¢" commodities, and the value relation
between the products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have
absolutely no connection with their physical properties and with the
material relations arising therefrom. There it is a definite social
relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form
of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to find an analogy,
we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious
world. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as
independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relation both
with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of
commodities with the products of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism
which attaches itself to the products of labour, so soon as they are
produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the
production of commodities.

This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis
has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that
produces them.

As a general rule, articles of utility become commodities, only because
they are products of the labour of private individuals or groups of
individuals who carry on their work independently of each other. The
sum total of the labour of all these private individuals forms the
aggregate labour of society. Since the producers do not come into
social contact with each other until they exchange their products, the
specific social character of each producer's labour does not show
itself except in the act of exchange. In other words, the labour of the
individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society, only by
means of the relations which the act of exchange establishes directly
between the products, and indirectly, through them, between the
producers. To the latter, therefore, the relations connecting the
labour of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct
social relations between individuals at work, but as what they really
are, material relations between persons and social relations between
things. It is only by being exchanged that the products of labour
acquire, as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their
varied forms of existence as objects of utility. This division of a
product into a useful thing and a value becomes practically important,
only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful articles
are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as
values has therefore to be taken into account, beforehand, during
production. From this moment the labour of the individual producer
acquires socially a twofold character. On the one hand, it must, as a
definite useful kind of labour, satisfy a definite social want, and
thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of all,
as a branch of a social division of labour that has sprung up
spontaneously. On the other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of
the individual producer himself, only in so far as the mutual
exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established
social fact, and therefore the private useful labour of each producer
ranks on an equality with that of all others. The equalisation of the
most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstraction
from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common
denominator, viz. expenditure of human labour power or human labour in
the abstract. The twofold social character of the labour of the
individual appears to him, when reflected in his brain, only under
those forms which are impressed upon that labour in every-day practice
by the exchange of products. In this way, the character that his own
labour possesses of being socially useful takes the form of the
condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for
others, and the social character that his particular labour has of
being the equal of all other particular kinds of labour, takes the form
that all the physically different articles that are the products of
labour. have one common quality, viz., that of having value.

Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each
other as values, it is not because we see in these articles the
material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. Quite the contrary:
whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products,
by that very act, we also equate, as human labour, the different kinds
of labour expended upon them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we
do it.8 Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing
what it is. It is value, rather, that converts every product into a
social hieroglyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to
get behind the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an
object of utility as a value, is just as much a social product as
language. The recent scientific discovery, that the products of labour,
so far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human
labour spent in their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the
history of the development of the human race, but, by no means,
dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour
appears to us to be an objective character of the products themselves.
The fact, that in the particular form of production with which we are
dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the specific social
character of private labour carried on independently, consists in the
equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue of its being human
labour, which character, therefore, assumes in the product the form of
value -- this fact appears to the producers, notwithstanding the
discovery above referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact,
that, after the discovery by science of the component gases of air, the
atmosphere itself remained unaltered.

What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they make an
exchange, is the question, how much of some other product they get for
their own? in what proportions the products are exchangeable? When
these proportions have, by custom, attained a certain stability, they
appear to result from the nature of the products, so that, for
instance, one ton of iron and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to
be of equal value as a pound of gold and a pound of iron in spite of
their different physical and chemical qualities appear to be of equal
weight. The character of having value, when once impressed upon
products, obtains fixity only by reason of their acting and re-acting
upon each other as quantities of value. These quantities vary
continually, independently of the will, foresight and action of the
producers. To them, their own social action takes the form of the
action of objects, which rule the producers instead of being ruled by
them. It requires a fully developed production of commodities before,
from accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs
up, that all the different kinds of private labour, which are carried
on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously developed
branches of the social division of labour, are continually being
reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society requires them.
And why? Because, in the midst of all the accidental and ever
fluctuating exchange relations between the products, the labour time
socially necessary for their production forcibly asserts itself like an
over-riding law of Nature. The law of gravity thus asserts itself when
a house falls about our ears.9 The determination of the magnitude of
value by labour time is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent
fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. Its discovery,
while removing all appearance of mere accidentality from the
determination of the magnitude of the values of products, yet in no way
alters the mode in which that determination takes place.

Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, also,
his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly opposite
to that of their actual historical development. He begins, "post
festum", with the results of the process of development ready to hand
before him. The characters that stamp products as commodities, and
whose establishment is a necessary preliminary to the circulation of
commodities, have already acquired the stability of natural,
self-understood forms of social life, before man seeks to decipher, not
their historical character, for in his eyes they are immutable, but
their meaning. Consequently it was the analysis of the prices of
commodities that alone led to the determination of the magnitude of
value, and it was the common expression of all commodities in money
that alone led to the establishment of their characters as values. It
is, however, just this ultimate money form of the world of commodities
that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social character of
private labour, and the social relations between the individual
producers. When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation to
linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human
labour, the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. Nevertheless,
when the producers of coats and boots compare those articles with
linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the
universal equivalent, they express the relation between their own
private labour and the collective labour of society in the same absurd
form.

The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms. They
are forms of thought expressing with social validity the conditions and
relations of a definite, historically determined mode of production,
viz., the production of commodities. The whole mystery of commodities,
all the magic and necromancy that surrounds the products of labour as
long as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so soon
as we come to other forms of production.

Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme with
political economists,0 let us take a look at him on his island.
Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and must
therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as making
tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting. Of his prayers
and the like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to
him, and he looks upon them as so much recreation. In spite of the
variety of his work, he knows that his labour, whatever its form, is
but the activity of one and the same Robinson, and consequently, that
it consists of nothing but different modes of human labour. Necessity
itself compels him to apportion his time accurately between his
different kinds of work. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in
his general activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater
or less as the case may be, to be overcome in attaining the useful
effect aimed at. This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience,
and having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the wreck,
commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. His
stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong to
him, of the operations necessary for their production; and lastly, of
the labour time that definite quantities of those objects have, on an
average, cost him. All the relations between Robinson and the objects
that form this wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear
as to be intelligible without exertion, even to Mr. Sedley Taylor. And
yet those relations contain all that is essential to the determination
of value.

Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed in light
to the European middle ages shrouded in darkness. Here, instead of the
independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs and lords, vassals
and suzerains, laymen and clergy. Personal dependence here
characterises the social relations of production just as much as it
does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that
production. But for the very reason that personal dependence forms the
ground-work of society, there is no necessity for labour and its
products to assume a fantastic form different from their reality. They
take the shape, in the transactions of society, of services in kind and
payments in kind. Here the particular and natural form of labour, and
not, as in a society based on production of commodities, its general
abstract form is the immediate social form of labour. Compulsory labour
is just as properly measured by time, as commodity-producing labour;
but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his lord,
is a definite quantity of his own personal labour power. The tithe to
be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his blessing. No
matter, then, what we may think of the parts played by the different
classes of people themselves in this society, the social relations
between individuals in the performance of their labour, appear at all
events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not disguised
under the shape of social relations between the products of labour.

For an example of labour in common or directly associated labour, we
have no occasion to go back to that spontaneously developed form which
we find on the threshold of the history of all civilised races.1 We
have one close at hand in the patriarchal industries of a peasant
family, that produces corn, cattle, yarn, linen, and clothing for home
use. These different articles are, as regards the family, so many
products of its labour, but as between themselves, they are not
commodities. The different kinds of labour, such as tillage, cattle
tending, spinning, weaving and making clothes, which result in the
various products, are in themselves, and such as they are, direct
social functions, because functions of the family, which, just as much
as a society based on the production of commodities, possesses a
spontaneously developed system of division of labour. The distribution
of the work within the family, and the regulation of the labour time of
the several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex as
upon natural conditions varying with the seasons. The labour power of
each individual, by its very nature, operates in this case merely as a
definite portion of the whole labour power of the family, and
therefore, the measure of the expenditure of individual labour power by
its duration, appears here by its very nature as a social character of
their labour.

Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a community of free
individuals, carrying on their work with the means of production in
common, in which the labour power of all the different individuals is
consciously applied as the combined labour power of the community. All
the characteristics of Robinson's labour are here repeated, but with
this difference, that they are social, instead of individual.
Everything produced by him was exclusively the result of his own
personal labour, and therefore simply an object of use for himself. The
total product of our community is a social product. One portion serves
as fresh means of production and remains social. But another portion is
consumed by the members as means of subsistence. A distribution of this
portion amongst them is consequently necessary. The mode of this
distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the
community, and the degree of historical development attained by the
producers. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a parallel with
the production of commodities, that the share of each individual
producer in the means of subsistence is determined by his labour time.
Labour time would, in that case, play a double part. Its apportionment
in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper
proportion between the different kinds of work to be done and the
various wants of the community. On the other hand, it also serves as a
measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each individual,
and of his share in the part of the total product destined for
individual consumption. The social relations of the individual
producers, with regard both to their labour and to its products, are in
this case perfectly simple and intelligible, and that with regard not
only to production but also to distribution.

The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. And for a
society based upon the production of commodities, in which the
producers in general enter into social relations with one another by
treating their products as commodities and values, whereby they reduce
their individual private labour to the standard of homogeneous human
labour -- for such a society, Christianity with its "cultus" of
abstract man, more especially in its bourgeois developments,
Protestantism, Deism, &c., is the most fitting form of religion. In the
ancient Asiatic and other ancient modes of production, we find that the
conversion of products into commodities, and therefore the conversion
of men into producers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which,
however, increases in importance as the primitive communities approach
nearer and nearer to their dissolution. Trading nations, properly so
called, exist in the ancient world only in its interstices, like the
gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores of
Polish society. Those ancient social organisms of production are, as
compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and transparent. But
they are founded either on the immature development of man
individually, who has not yet severed the umbilical cord that unites
him with his fellowmen in a primitive tribal community, or upon direct
relations of subjection. They can arise and exist only when the
development of the productive power of labour has not risen beyond a
low stage, and when, therefore, the social relations within the sphere
of material life, between man and man, and between man and Nature, are
correspondingly narrow. This narrowness is reflected in the ancient
worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular religions.
The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only then
finally vanish, when the practical relations of every-day life offer to
man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable relations with
regard to his fellowmen and to Nature.

The life-process of society, which is based on the process of material
production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it is treated as
production by freely associated men, and is consciously regulated by
them in accordance with a settled plan. This, however, demands for
society a certain material ground-work or set of conditions of
existence which in their turn are the spontaneous product of a long and
painful process of development.

Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incompletely,2 value and
its magnitude, and has discovered what lies beneath these forms. But it
has never once asked the question why labour is represented by the
value of its product and labour time by the magnitude of that value.3
These formul√¶, which bear it stamped upon them in unmistakable letters
that they belong to a state of society, in which the process of
production has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by
him, such formul√¶ appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a
self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as productive labour itself.
Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois form, are
treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the Fathers of the
Church treated pre-Christian religions.4


To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in
commodities, or by the objective appearance of the social
characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, by the dull
and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in the formation of
exchange value. Since exchange value is a definite social manner of
expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object, Nature has no
more to do with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange.

The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a
commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the most general
and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. It therefore makes its
appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same
predominating and characteristic manner as now-a-days. Hence its Fetish
character is comparatively easy to be seen through. But when we come to
more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishes.
Whence arose the illusions of the monetary system? To it gold and
silver, when serving as money, did not represent a social relation
between producers, but were natural objects with strange social
properties. And modern economy, which looks down with such disdain on
the monetary system, does not its superstition come out as clear as
noon-day, whenever it treats of capital? How long is it since economy
discarded the physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil
and not out of society?

But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet another
example relating to the commodity form. Could commodities themselves
speak, they would say: Our use value may be a thing that interests men.
It is no part of us as objects. What, however, does belong to us as
objects, is our value. Our natural intercourse as commodities proves
it. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but exchange values. Now
listen how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist.

'Value' -- ("i.e.", exchange value) 'is a property of things, riches'
-- ("i.e.", use value) 'of man. Value, in this sense, necessarily
implies exchanges, riches do not.'5

'Riches' (use value) 'are the attribute of men, value is the attribute
of commodities. A man or a community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is
valuable...' A pearl or a diamond is valuable as a pearl or a diamond.6


So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange value either in a pearl
or a diamond. The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who
by-the-bye lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the
use value of objects belongs to them independently of their material
properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a part of them
as objects. What confirms them in this view, is the peculiar
circumstance that the use value of objects is realised without
exchange, by means of a direct relation between the objects and man,
while, on the other hand, their value is realised only by exchange,
that is, by means of a social process. Who fails here to call to mind
our good friend, Dogberry, who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, 'To be
a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing
comes by Nature.'7



== Chapter 2: Exchange = =

It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make exchanges of
their own account. We must, therefore, have recourse to their
guardians, who are also their owners. Commodities are things, and
therefore without power of resistance against man. If they are wanting
in docility he can use force; in other words, he can take possession of
them. In order that these objects may enter into relation with each
other as commodities, their guardians must place themselves in relation
to one another, as persons whose will resides in those object, and must
behave in such a way that each does not appropriate the commodity of
the other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by
mutual consent. They must therefore, mutually recognise in each other
the rights of private proprietors. This juridical relation, which thus
expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract be part of a
developed legal system or not, is a relation between two wills, and is
but the reflex of the real economic relation between the two. It is
this economic relation that determines the subject-matter comprised in
each such juridical act.

The persons exist for one another merely as representatives of, and,
therefore. as owners of, commodities. In the course of our
investigation we shall find, in general, that the characters who appear
on the economic stage are but the personifications of the economic
relations that exist between them.

What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the fact, that
it looks upon every other commodity as but the form of appearance of
its own value. A born leveller and a cynic, it is always ready to
exchange not only soul, but body, with any and every other commodity,
be the same more repulsive than Maritornes herself. The owner makes up
for this lack in the commodity of a sense of the concrete, by his own
five and more senses. His commodity possesses for himself no immediate
use-value. Otherwise, he would not bring it to the market. It has
use-value for others; but for himself its only direct use-value is that
of being a depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of
exchange. Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for
commodities whose value in use is of service to him. All commodities
are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their
non-owners. Consequently, they must all change hands. But this change
of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter puts them
in relation with each other as values, and realises them as values.
Hence commodities must be realised as values before they can be
realised as use-values.

On the other hand, they must show that they are use-values before they
can be realised as values. For the labour spent upon them counts
effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that is useful for
others. Whether that labour is useful for others, and its product
consequently capable of satisfying the wants of others, can be proved
only by the act of exchange.

Every owner of a commodity wishes to part with it in exchange only for
those commodities whose use-value satisfies some want of his. Looked at
in this way, exchange is for him simply a private transaction. On the
other hand, he desires to realise the value of his commodity, to
convert it into any other suitable commodity of equal value,
irrespective of whether his own commodity has or has not any use-value
for the owner of the other. From this point of view, exchange is for
him a social transaction of a general character. But one and the same
set of transactions cannot be simultaneously for all owners of
commodities both exclusively private and exclusively social and
general.

Let us look at the matter a little closer. To the owner of a commodity,
every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a particular
equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is the universal
equivalent for all the others. But since this applies to every owner,
there is, in fact, no commodity acting as universal equivalent, and the
relative value of commodities possesses no general form under which
they can be equated as values and have the magnitude of their values
compared. So far, therefore, they do not confront each other as
commodities, but only as products or use-values. In their difficulties
our commodity owners think like Faust: 'Im Anfang war die Tat.'

 They therefore acted and transacted before they thought. Instinctively
 they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. They
 cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, and therefore
 as commodities, except by comparing them with some one other commodity
 as the universal equivalent. That we saw from the analysis of a
 commodity. But a particular commodity cannot become the universal
 equivalent except by a social act. The social action therefore of all
 other commodities, sets apart the particular commodity in which they
 all represent their values. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity
 becomes the form of the socially recognised universal equivalent. To
 be the universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the
 specific function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. Thus it
 becomes -- money. 'Illi unum consilium habent et virtutem et
 potestatem suam bestiae tradunt. Et ne quis possit emere aut vendere,
 nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestiae aut numerum nominis
 ejus.'
 
 ("Apocalypse".) Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course
 of the exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically
 equated to one another and thus by practice converted into
 commodities. The historical progress and extension of exchanges
 develops the contrast, latent in commodities, between use-value and
 value. The necessity for giving an external expression to this
 contrast for the purposes of commercial intercourse, urges on the
 establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no rest until
 it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of commodities
 into commodities and money. At the same rate, then, as the conversion
 of products into commodities is being accomplished, so also is the
 conversion of one special commodity into money.
 
The direct barter of products attains the elementary form of the
relative expression of value in one respect, but not in another. That
form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. The form of direct barter is x
use-value A = y use-value B. The articles A and B in this case are not
as yet commodities, but become so only by the act of barter. The first
step made by an object of utility towards acquiring exchange-value is
when it forms a non-use-value for its owner, and that happens when it
forms a superfluous portion of some article required for his immediate
wants. Objects in themselves are external to man, and consequently
alienable by him. In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it
is only necessary for men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each
other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by implication
as independent individuals. But such a state of reciprocal independence
has no existence in a primitive society based on property in common,
whether such a society takes the form of a patriarchal family, an
ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian Inca State. The exchange of
commodities, therefore, first begins on the boundaries of such
communities, at their points of contact with other similar communities,
or with members of the latter. So soon, however, as products once
become commodities in the external relations of a community, they also,
by reaction, become so in its internal intercourse. The proportions in
which they are exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. What
makes them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to
alienate them. Meantime the need for foreign objects of utility
gradually establishes itself. The constant repetition of exchange makes
it a normal social act. In the course of time, therefore, some portion
at least of the products of labour must be produced with a special view
to exchange. From that moment the distinction becomes firmly
established between the utility of an object for the purposes of
consumption, and its utility for the purposes of exchange. Its
use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange-value. On the other
hand, the quantitative proportion in which the articles are
exchangeable, becomes dependent on their production itself. Custom
stamps them as values with definite magnitudes.

In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly a means of
exchange to its owner, and to all other persons an equivalent, but that
only in so far as it has use-value for them. At this stage, therefore,
the articles exchanged do not acquire a value-form independent of their
own use-value, or of the individual needs of the exchangers. The
necessity for a value-form grows with the increasing number and variety
of the commodities exchanged. The problem and the means of solution
arise simultaneously. Commodity-owners never equate their own
commodities to those of others, and exchange them on a large scale,
without different kinds of commodities belonging to different owners
being exchangeable for, and equated as values to, one and the same
special article. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming the
equivalent of various other commodities, acquires at once, though
within narrow limits, the character of a general social equivalent.
This character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that
called it into life. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first
to this and then to that commodity. But with the development of
exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts of
commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the money-form. The
particular kind of commodity to which it sticks is at first a matter of
accident. Nevertheless there are two circumstances whose influence is
decisive. The money-form attaches itself either to the most important
articles of exchange from outside, and these in fact are primitive and
natural forms in which the exchange-value of home products finds
expression; or else it attaches itself to the object of utility that
forms, like cattle, the chief portion of indigenous alienable wealth.
Nomad races are the first to develop the money-form, because all their
worldly goods consist of moveable objects and are therefore directly
alienable; and because their mode of life, by continually bringing them
into contact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of
products. Man has often made man himself, under the form of slaves,
serve as the primitive material of money, but has never used land for
that purpose. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois society
already well developed. It dates from the last third of the 17th
century, and the first attempt to put it in practice on a national
scale was made a century afterwards, during the French bourgeois
revolution.

In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the value of
commodities more and more expands into an embodiment of human labour in
the abstract, in the same proportion the character of money attaches
itself to commodities that are by Nature fitted to perform the social
function of a universal equivalent. Those commodities are the precious
metals.

The truth of the proposition that, 'although gold and silver are not by
Nature money, money is by Nature gold and silver,' is shown by the
fitness of the physical properties of these metals for the functions of
money. Up to this point, however, we are acquainted only with one
function of money, namely, to serve as the form of manifestation of the
value of commodities, or as the material in which the magnitudes of
their values are socially expressed. An adequate form of manifestation
of value, a fit embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore
equal human labour, that material alone can be whose every sample
exhibits the same uniform qualities. On the other hand, since the
difference between the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, the
money commodity must be susceptible of merely quantitative differences,
must therefore be divisible at will, and equally capable of being
reunited. Gold and silver possess these properties by Nature.

The use-value of the money-commodity becomes two-fold. In addition to
its special use-value as a commodity (gold, for instance, serving to
stop teeth, to form the raw material of articles of luxury, &c.), it
acquires a formal use-value, originating in its specific social
function.

Since all commodities are merely particular equivalents of money, the
latter being their universal equivalent, they, with regard to the
latter as the universal commodity, play the parts of particular
commodities.

We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown upon one
single commodity, of the value relations between all the rest. That
money is a commodity is therefore a new discovery only for those who,
when they analyse it, start from its fully developed shape. The act of
exchange gives to the commodity converted into money, not its value,
but its specific value-form. By confounding these two distinct things
some writers have been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is
imaginary.0 The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced
by mere symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion,
that it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless under this error lurked a
presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an inseparable
part of that object, but is simply the form under which certain social
relations manifest themselves. In this sense every commodity is a
symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only the material
envelope of the human labour spent upon it.1 But if it be declared that
the social characters assumed by objects, or the material forms assumed
by the social qualities of labour under the r√©gime of a definite mode
of production, are mere symbols, it is in the same breath also declared
that these characteristics are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the
so-called universal consent of mankind. This suited the mode of
explanation in favour during the 18th century. Unable to account for
the origin of the puzzling forms assumed by social relations between
man and man, people sought to denude them of their strange appearance
by ascribing to them a conventional origin.

It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form of a
commodity does not imply the determination of the magnitude of its
value. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold is money, and
consequently directly exchangeable for all other commodities, yet that
fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs., for instance, of gold is
worth. Money, like every other commodity, cannot express the magnitude
of its value except relatively in other commodities. This value is
determined by the labour-time required for its production, and is
expressed by the quantity of any other commodity that costs the same
amount of labour-time.2 Such quantitative determination of its relative
value takes place at the source of its production by means of barter.
When it steps into circulation as money, its value is already given. In
the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that
money is a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy of the
analysis. The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that money is a
commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what means a commodity
becomes money.3


We have already seen, from the most elementary expression of value, x
commodity A = y commodity B, that the object in which the magnitude of
the value of another object is represented, appears to have the
equivalent form independently of this relation, as a social property
given to it by Nature. We followed up this false appearance to its
final establishment, which is complete so soon as the universal
equivalent form becomes identified with the bodily form of a particular
commodity, and thus crystallised into the money-form. What appears to
happen is, not that gold becomes money, in consequence of all other
commodities expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that
all other commodities universally express their values in gold, because
it is money. The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the result
and leave no trace behind. Commodities find their own value already
completely represented, without any initiative on their part, in
another commodity existing in company with them. These objects, gold
and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of the earth, are
forthwith the direct incarnation of all human labour. Hence the magic
of money. In the form of society now under consideration, the behaviour
of men in the social process of production is purely atomic. Hence
their relations to each other in production assume a material character
independent of their control and conscious individual action. These
facts manifest themselves at first by products as a general rule taking
the form of commodities. We have seen how the progressive development
of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged commodity
with the character of money. Hence the riddle presented by money is but
the riddle presented by commodities; only it now strikes us in its most
glaring form.

== Chapter 3: Money, Or the Circulation of Commodities = =

=== Section 1: The Measure of Values == =

Throughout this work, I assume, for the sake of simplicity, gold as the
money-commodity.

The first chief function of money is to supply commodities with the
material for the expression of their values, or to represent their
values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and
quantitatively comparable. It thus serves as a "universal measure of
value". And only by virtue of this function does gold, the equivalent
commodity "par excellence", become money.

It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. Just the
contrary. It is because all commodities, as values, are realised human
labour, and therefore commensurable, that their values can be measured
by one and the same special commodity, and the latter be converted into
the common measure of their values, "i.e"., into money. Money as a
measure of value, is the phenomenal form that must of necessity be
assumed by that measure of value which is immanent in commodities,
labour-time.

The expression of the value of a commodity in gold -- "x" commodity A =
"y" money-commodity -- is its money-form or price. A single equation,
such as 1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold, now suffices to express the
value of the iron in a socially valid manner. There is no longer any
need for this equation to figure as a link in the chain of equations
that express the values of all other commodities, because the
equivalent commodity, gold, now has the character of money. The general
form of relative value has resumed its original shape of simple or
isolated relative value. On the other hand, the expanded expression of
relative value, the endless series of equations, has now become the
form peculiar to the relative value of the money-commodity. The series
itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices of
actual commodities. We have only to read the quotations of a price-list
backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of money expressed in all
sorts of commodities. But money itself has no price. In order to put it
on an equal footing with all other commodities in this respect, we
should be obliged to equate it to itself as its own equivalent.

The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form of value
generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable bodily form; it
is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. Although invisible, the
value of iron, linen and corn has actual existence in these very
articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their equality with gold, a
relation that, so to say, exists only in their own heads. Their owner
must, therefore, lend them his tongue, or hang a ticket on them, before
their prices can be communicated to the outside world. Since the
expression of the value of commodities in gold is a merely ideal act,
we may use for this purpose imaginary or ideal money. Every trader
knows, that he is far from having turned his goods into money, when he
has expressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it
does not require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that metal
millions of pounds' worth of goods. When, therefore, money serves as a
measure of value; it is employed only as imaginary or ideal money. This
circumstance has given rise to the wildest theories. But, although the
money that performs the functions of a measure of value is only ideal
money, price depends entirely upon the actual substance that is money.
The value, or in other words, the quantity of human labour contained in
a ton of iron, is expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the
money-commodity as contains the same amount of labour as the iron.
According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or
copper, the value of the ton of iron will be expressed by very
different prices, or will be represented by very different quantities
of those metals respectively.

If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and silver, are
simultaneously measures of value, all commodities have two prices --
one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. These exist quietly side by
side, so long as the ratio of The value of silver to that of gold
remains unchanged, say, at 15:1. Every change in their ratio disturbs
the ratio which exists between the gold-prices and the silver-prices of
commodities, and thus proves, by facts, that a double standard of value
is inconsistent with the functions of a standard.

Commodities with definite prices present themselves under the form; "a"
commodity A = x gold; "b" commodity B = z gold; "c" commodity C = y
gold, "&c"., where "a", "b", "c", represent definite quantities of the
commodities A, B, C and x, z, y, definite quantities of gold. The
values of these commodities are, therefore, changed in imagination into
so many different quantities of gold. Hence, in spite of the confusing
variety of the commodities themselves, their values become magnitudes
of the same denomination, gold-magnitudes. They are now capable of
being compared with each other and measured, and the want becomes
technically felt of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as
a unit measure. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts,
becomes itself the standard or scale. Before they become money, gold,
silver, and copper already possess such standard measures in their
standards of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, while
serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible into ounces, and,
on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. It is owing to
this that, in all metallic currencies, the names given to the standards
of money or of price were originally taken from the pre-existing names
of the standards of weight.

As "measure of Value", and as "standard of price", money has two
entirely distinct functions to perform. It is the measure of value
inasmuch as it is the socially recognised incarnation of human labour;
it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight of metal.
As the measure of value it serves to convert the values of all the
manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quantities of gold; as
the standard of price it measures those quantities of gold. The measure
of values measures commodities considered as values; the standard of
price measures, on the contrary, quantities of gold by a unit quantity
of gold, not the value of one quantity of gold by the weight of
another. In order to make gold a standard of price, a certain weight
must be fixed upon as the unit. In this case, as in all cases of
measuring quantities of the same denomination, the establishment of an
unvarying unit of measure is all-important. Hence, the less the unit is
subject to variation, so much the better does the standard of price
fulfil its office. But only in so far as it is itself a product of
labour, and, therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve
as a measure of value.

It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value of
gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of price.
No matter how this value varies, the proportions between the values of
different quantities of the metal remain constant. However great the
fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold still have 12 times the value of 1
ounce; and in prices, the only thing considered is the relation between
different quantities of gold. Since, on the other hand, no rise or fall
in the value of an ounce of gold can alter its weight, no alteration
can take place in the weight of its aliquot parts. Thus gold always
renders the same service as an invariable standard of price, however
much its value may vary.

In the second place, a change in the value of gold does not interfere
with its functions as a measure of value. The change affects all
commodities simultaneously, and, therefore, "caeteris paribus", leaves
their relative values "inter se", unaltered, although those values are
now expressed in higher or lower gold-prices.

Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by a definite
quantity of the use-value of some other commodity, so in estimating the
value of the former in gold, we assume nothing more than that the
production of a given quantity of gold costs, at the given period, a
given amount of labour. As regards the fluctuations of prices
generally, they are subject to the laws of elementary relative value
investigated in a former chapter.

A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, either
from a rise in their values -- the value of money remaining constant --
or from a fall in the value of money, the values of commodities
remaining constant. On the other hand, a general fall in prices can
result only, either from a fall in the values of commodities -- the
value of money remaining constant -- or from a rise in the value of
money, the values of commodities remaining constant. It therefore by no
means follows, that a rise in the value of money necessarily implies a
proportional fall in the prices of commodities; or that a fall in the
value of money implies a proportional rise in prices. Such change of
price holds good only in the case of commodities whose value remains
constant. With those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously
with, and proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in
price. And if their value rise either slower or faster than that of
money, the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the
difference between the change in their value and that of money; and so
on.

Let us now go back to the consideration of the price-form.

By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current moneynames of
the various weights of the precious metal figuring as money, and the
actual weights which those names originally represented. This
discrepancy is the result of historical causes, among which the chief
are: -- (1) The importation of foreign money into an imperfectly
developed community. This happened in Rome in its early days, where
gold and silver coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. The
names of these foreign coins never coincide with those of the
indigenous weights. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is
thrust out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value,
copper by silver, silver by gold, however much this order of sequence
may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. The word pound, for
instance, was the money-name given to an actual pound weight of silver.
When gold replaced silver as a measure of value, the same name was
applied according to the ratio between the values of silver and gold,
to perhaps 1-15th of a pound of gold. The word pound, as a money-name,
thus becomes differentiated from the same word as a weight-name. (3)
The debasing of money carried on for centuries by kings and princes to
such an extent that, of the original weights of the coins, nothing in
fact remained but the names.

These historical causes convert the separation of the money-name from
the weight-name into an established habit with the community. Since the
standard of money is on the one hand purely conventional, and must on
the other hand find general acceptance, it is in the end regulated by
law. A given weight of one of the precious metals, an ounce of gold,
for instance, becomes officially divided into aliquot parts, with
legally bestowed names, such as pound, dollar, &c. These aliquot parts,
which thenceforth serve as units of money, are then subdivided into
other aliquot parts with legal names, such as shilling, penny, &c.0
But, both before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight
of metal is the standard of metallic money. The sole alteration
consists in the subdivision and denomination.

The prices, or quantities of gold, into which the values of commodities
are ideally changed, are therefore now expressed in the names of coins,
or in the legally valid names of the subdivisions of the gold standard.
Hence, instead of saying: A quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold;
we say, it is worth Pounds 3 17s. 10  1/2d. In this way commodities
express by their prices how much they are worth, and money serves as
"money of account" whenever it is a question of fixing the value of an
article in its money-form. 1


The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities of that
thing. I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his name is Jacob. In
the same way with regard to money, every trace of a value-relation
disappears in the names pound, dollar, franc, ducat, &c. The confusion
caused by attributing a hidden meaning to these cabalistic signs is all
the greater, because these money-names express both the values of
commodities, and, at the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the
metal that is the standard of money.2 On the other hand, it is
absolutely necessary that value, in order that it may be distinguished
from the varied bodily forms of commodities, should assume this
material and unmeaning, but, at the same time, purely social form. 3


Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. Hence
the expression of the equivalence of a commodity with the sum of money
constituting its price, is a tautology4 , just as in general the
expression of the relative value of a commodity is a statement of the
equivalence of two commodities. But although price, being the exponent
of the magnitude of a commodity's value, is the exponent of its
exchange-ratio with money, it does not follow that the exponent of this
exchange-ratio is necessarily the exponent of the magnitude of the
commodity's value. Suppose two equal quantities of socially necessary
labour to be respectively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and Pounds
2 (nearly  1/2 oz. of gold), Pounds 2 is the expression in money of the
magnitude of the value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. If now
circumstances allow of this price being raised to Pounds 3, or compel
it to be reduced to Pounds 1, then although Pounds 1 and Pounds 3 may
be too small or too great properly to express the magnitude of the
wheat's value; nevertheless they are its prices, for they are, in the
first place, the form under which its value appears, "i.e"., money; and
in the second place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. If
the conditions of production, in other words, if the productive power
of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time must,
both before and after the change in price, be expended in the
reproduction of a quarter of wheat. This circumstance depends, neither
on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners of other
commodities.

Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, it
expresses the connexion that necessarily exists between a certain
article and the portion of the total labour-time of society required to
produce it. As soon as magnitude of value is converted into price, the
above necessary relation takes the shape of a more or less accidental
exchange-ratio between a single commodity and another, the
money-commodity. But this exchange-ratio may express either the real
magnitude of that commodity's value, or the quantity of gold deviating
from that value, for which, according to circumstances, it may be
parted with. The possibility, therefore, of quantitative incongruity
between price and magnitude of value, or the deviation of the former
from the latter, is inherent in the price-form itself. This is no
defect, but, on the contrary, admirably adapts the price-form to a mode
of production whose inherent laws impose themselves only as the mean of
apparently lawless irregularities that compensate one another.

The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the possibility of
a quantitative incongruity between magnitude of value and price,
"i.e"., between the former and its expression in money, but it may also
conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so much so, that, although money
is nothing but the value-form of commodities, price ceases altogether
to express value. Objects that in themselves are no commodities, such
as conscience, honour, &c., are capable of being offered for sale by
their holders, and of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of
commodities. Hence an object may have a price without having value. The
price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in
mathematics. On the other hand, the imaginary price-form may sometimes
conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for instance,
the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, because no
human labour has been incorporated in it.

Price, like relative value in general, expresses the value of a
commodity "(e.g"., a ton of iron), by stating that a given quantity of
the equivalent "(e.g"., an ounce of gold), is directly exchangeable for
iron. But it by no means states the converse, that iron is directly
exchangeable for gold. In order, therefore, that a commodity may in
practice act effectively as exchange-value, it must quit its bodily
shape, must transform itself from mere imaginary into real gold,
although to the commodity such transubstantiation may be more difficult
than to the Hegelian 'concept,' the transition from 'necessity' to
'freedom,' or to a lobster the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome
the putting off of the old Adam.5 Though a commodity may, side by side
with its actual form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the
form of gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both
iron and gold. To fix its price, it suffices to equate it to gold in
imagination. But to enable it to render to its owner the service of a
universal equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. If the
owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some other commodity
offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price of the iron as
proof that it was already money, he would get the same answer as St.
Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter recited the creed --

'Assad bene e trascorsa D'esta moneta gia la lega e'l peso, Ma dimmi se
tu l'hai nella tua borsa.'

A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchangeable for
money, and also that it must be so exchanged. On the other hand, gold
serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in
the process of exchange, established itself as the money-commodity.
Under the ideal measure of values there lurks the hard cash.

=== Section 2: The Medium of Circulation == =

===== A. The Metamorphosis of Commodities ==== =

We saw in a former chapter that the exchange of commodities implies
contradictory and mutually exclusive conditions. The differentiation of
commodities into commodities and money does not sweep away these
inconsistencies, but develops a "modus vivendi", a form in which they
can exist side by side. This is generally the way in which real
contradictions are reconciled. For instance, it is a contradiction to
depict one body as constantly falling towards another, and as, at the
same time, constantly flying away from it. The ellipse is a form of
motion which, while allowing this contradiction to go on, at the same
time reconciles it.

In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are
transferred from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in
which they become use-values, it is a social circulation of matter. The
product of one form of useful labour replaces that of another. When
once a commodity has found a resting-place, where it can serve as a
use-value, it falls out of the sphere of exchange into that of
consumption. But the former sphere alone interests us at present. We
have, therefore, now to consider exchange from a formal point of view;
to investigate the change of form or metamorphosis of commodities which
effectuates the social circulation of matter.

The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very imperfect.
The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indistinct notions of
value itself, that every change of form in a commodity results from the
exchange of two commodities, an ordinary one and the money-commodity.
If we keep in view the material fact alone that a commodity has been
exchanged for gold, we overlook the very thing that we ought to observe
-- namely, what has happened to the form of the commodity. We overlook
the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and that when
other commodities express their prices in gold, this gold is but the
money-form of those commodities themselves.

Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange just as
they are. The process then differentiates them into commodities and
money, and thus produces an external opposition corresponding to the
internal opposition inherent in them, as being at once use-values and
values. Commodities as use-values now stand opposed to money as
exchange-value. On the other hand, both opposing sides are commodities,
unities of use-value and value. But this unity of differences manifests
itself at two opposite poles, and at each pole in an opposite way.
Being poles they are as necessarily opposite as they are connected. On
the one side of the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in
reality a use-value. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price,
by which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real
embodiment of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic
reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. Gold, as gold, is
exchange-value itself. As to its use-value, that has only an ideal
existence, represented by the series of expressions of relative value
in which it stands face to face with all other commodities, the sum of
whose uses makes up the sum of the various uses of gold. These
antagonistic forms of commodities are the real forms in which the
process of their exchange moves and takes place.

Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity -- say, our old friend
the weaver of linen -- to the scene of action, the market. His 20 yards
of linen has a definite price, Pounds 2. He exchanges it for the Pounds
2, and then, like a man of the good old stamp that he is, he parts with
the Pounds 2 for a family Bible of the same price. The linen, which in
his eyes is a mere commodity, a depository of value, he alienates in
exchange for gold, which is the linen's value-form, and this form he
again parts with for another commodity, the Bible, which is destined to
enter his house as an object of utility and of edification to its
inmates. The exchange becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses
of opposite yet supplementary character -- the conversion of the
commodity into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a
commodity.6 The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them
distinct transactions of the weaver -- selling, or the exchange of the
commodity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a
commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy.

The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, is this,
that instead of being in possession of the linen, he now has the Bible;
instead of his original commodity, he now possesses another of the same
value but of different utility. In like manner he procures his other
means of subsistence and means of production. From his point of view,
the whole process effectuates nothing more than the exchange of the
product of his labour for the product of some one else's, nothing more
than an exchange of products.

The exchange of commodities is therefore accompanied by the following
changes in their form.


Commodity -- Money -- Commodity.C------------ M ------------C.


The result of the whole process is, so far as concerns the objects
themselves, C -- C, the exchange of one commodity for another, the
circulation of materialised social labour. When this result is
attained, the process is at an end.

===== C -- M. First metamorphosis, or sale ==== =

The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, into the body
of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the salto mortale of
the commodity. If it falls short, then, although the commodity itself
is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. The social division of labour
causes his labour to be as one-sided as his wants are many-sided. This
is precisely the reason why the product of his labour serves him solely
as exchange-value. But it cannot acquire the properties of a socially
recognised universal equivalent, except by being converted into money.
That money, however, is in some one else's pocket. In order to entice
the money out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all
things, be a use-value to the owner of the money. For this, it is
necessary that the labour expended upon it, be of a kind that is
socially useful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social
division of labour. But division of labour is a system of production
which has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow behind the backs
of the producers. The commodity to be exchanged may possibly be the
product of some new kind of labour, that pretends to satisfy newly
arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself to new requirements. A
particular operation, though yesterday, perhaps, forming one out of the
many operations conducted by one producer in creating a given
commodity, may to-day separate itself from this connexion, may
establish itself as an independent branch of labour and send its
incomplete product to market as an independent commodity. The
circumstances may or may not be ripe for such a separation. To-day the
product satisfies a social want. Tomorrow the article may, either
altogether or partially, be superseded by some other appropriate
product. Moreover, although our weaver's labour may be a recognised
branch of the social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means
sufficient to guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen. If the
community's want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every other
want, should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers. our
friend's product is superfluous, redundant, and consequently useless.
Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, our friend does
not frequent the market for the purpose of making presents. But suppose
his product turn out a real use-value, and thereby attracts money? The
question arises, how much will it attract? No doubt the answer is
already anticipated in the price of the article, in the exponent of the
magnitude of its value. We leave out of consideration here any
accidental miscalculation of value by our friend, a mistake that is
soon rectified in the market. We suppose him to have spent on his
product only that amount of labour-time that is on an average socially
necessary. The price then, is merely the moneyname of the quantity of
social labour realised in his commodity. But without the leave, and
behind the back, of our weaver, the old-fashioned mode of weaving
undergoes a change. The labour-time that yesterday was without doubt
socially necessary to the production of a yard of linen, ceases to be
so to-day, a fact which the owner of the money is only too eager to
prove from the prices quoted by our friend's competitors. Unluckily for
him, weavers are not few and far between. Lastly, suppose that every
piece of linen in the market contains no more labour-time than is
socially necessary. In spite of this, all these pieces taken as a
whole, may have had superfluous labour-time spent upon them. If the
market cannot stomach the whole quantity at the normal price of 2
shillings a yard, this proves that too great a portion of the total
labour of the community has been expended in the form of weaving. The
effect is the same as if each individual weaver had expended more
labour-time upon his particular product than is socially necessary.
Here we may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung
together. All the linen in the market counts but as one article of
commerce, of which each piece is only an aliquot part. And as a matter
of fact, the value also of each single yard is but the materialised
form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homogeneous
human labour. 7


We see then, commodities are in love with money, but 'the course of
true love never did run smooth.' The quantitative division of labour is
brought about in exactly the same spontaneous and accidental manner as
its qualitative division. The owners of commodities therefore find out,
that the same division of labour that turns them into independent
private producers, also frees the social process of production and the
relations of the individual producers to each other within that
process, from all dependence on the will of those producers, and that
the seeming mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by a
system of general and mutual dependence through or by means of the
products.

The division of labour converts the product of labour into a commodity,
and thereby makes necessary its further conversion into money. At the
same time it also makes the accomplishment of this transubstantiation
quite accidental. Here, however, we are only concerned with the
phenomenon in its integrity, and we therefore assume its progress to be
normal. Moreover, if the conversion take place at all, that is, if the
commodity be not absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take
place although the price realised may be abnormally above or below the
value.

The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer has his gold
replaced by a commodity. The fact which here stares us in the face is,
that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and Pounds 2, have changed
hands and places, in other words, that they have been exchanged. But
for what is the commodity exchanged? For the shape assumed by its own
value, for the universal equivalent. And for what is the gold
exchanged? For a particular form of its own use-value. Why does gold
take the form of money face to face with the linen? Because the linen's
price of Pounds 2, its denomination in money, has already equated the
linen to gold in its character of money. A commodity strips off its
original commodity-form on being alienated, "i.e"., on the instant its
use-value actually attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally
in its price. The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal
value-form, is therefore at the same time the realisation of the ideal
use-value of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the
simultaneous conversion of money into a commodity. The apparently
single process is in reality a double one. From the pole of the
commodity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the
money-owner, it is a purchase. In other words, a sale is a purchase,
C--M is also M--C.8


Up to this point we have considered men in only one economic capacity,
that of owners of commodities, a capacity in which they appropriate the
produce of the labour of others, by alienating that of their own
labour. Hence, for one commodity-owner to meet with another who has
money, it is necessary, either, that the product of the labour of the
latter person, the buyer, should be in itself money, should be gold,
the material of which money consists, or that his product should
already have changed its skin and have stripped off its original form
of a useful object. In order that it may play the part of money, gold
must of course enter the market at some point or other. This point is
to be found at the source of production of the metal, at which place
gold is bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other
product of equal value. From that moment it always represents the
realised price of some commodity.9 Apart from its exchange for other
commodities at the source of its production, gold, in whose-so-ever
hands it may be, is the transformed shape of some commodity alienated
by its owner; it is the product of a sale or of the first metamorphosis
C--M.0 Gold, as we saw, became ideal money, or a measure of values, in
consequence of all commodities measuring their values by it, and thus
contrasting it ideally with their natural shape as useful objects, and
making it the shape of their value. It became real money, by the
general alienation of commodities, by actually changing places with
their natural forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality the
embodiment of their values. When they assume this money-shape,
commodities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of
the particular kind of labour to which they owe their creation, in
order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recognised
incarnation of homogeneous human labour. We cannot tell from the mere
look of a piece of money, for what particular commodity it has been
exchanged. Under their money-form all commodities look alike. Hence,
money may be dirt, although dirt is not money. We will assume that the
two gold pieces, in consideration of which our weaver has parted with
his linen, are the metamorphosed shape of a quarter of wheat. The sale
of the linen, C--M, is at the same time its purchase, M--C. But the
sale is the first act of a process that ends with a transaction of an
opposite nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the purchase of the
linen, on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transaction
of an opposite nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. C--M
(linen--money), which is the first phase of C--M'--C
(linen--money--Bible), is also M--C (money--linen), the last phase of
another movement C--M--C (wheat--money--linen). The first metamorphosis
of one commodity, its transformation from a commodity into money, is
therefore also invariably the second metamorphosis of some other
commodity, the retransformation of the latter from money into a
commodity.1


===== M--C, or purchase. The second and concluding metamorphosis of a
commodity ==== =

Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other commodities, the
result of their general alienation, for this reason it is alienable
itself without restriction or condition. It reads all prices backwards,
and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies of all other
commodities, which offer to it the material for the realisation of its
own use-value. At the same time the prices, wooing glances cast at
money by commodities, define the limits of its convertibility, by
pointing to its quantity. Since every commodity, on becoming money,
disappears as a commodity, it is impossible to tell from the money
itself, how it got into the hands of its possessor, or what article has
been changed into it. Non olet, from whatever source it may come.
Representing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the
other a commodity to be bought.2

M--C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C--M, a sale; the concluding
metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamorphosis of another.
With regard to our weaver, the life of his commodity ends with the
Bible, into which he has reconverted his Pounds 2. But suppose the
seller of the Bible turns the Pounds 2 set free by the weaver into
brandy M--C, the concluding phase of C--M--C (linen--money--Bible), is
also C--M, the first phase of C--M--C (Bible--money--brandy). The
producer of a particular commodity has that one article alone to offer;
this he sells very often in large quantities, but his many and various
wants compel him to split up the price realised, the sum of money set
free, into numerous purchases. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of
various articles. The concluding metamorphosis of a commodity thus
constitutes an aggregation of first metamorphoses of various other
commodities.

If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a commodity, as a
whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made up of two
opposite and complementary movements, C--M and M--C. These two
antithetical transmutations of a commodity are brought about by two
antithetical social acts on the part of the owner, and these acts in
their turn stamp the character of the economic parts played by him. As
the person who makes a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a
purchase, he is a buyer. But just as, upon every such transmutation of
a commodity, its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist
simultaneously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer
opposed to him, and every buyer a seller. While one particular
commodity is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a
commodity into money and from money into another commodity, the owner
of the commodity changes in succession his part from that of seller to
that of buyer. These characters of seller and buyer are therefore not
permanent, but attach themselves in turns to the various persons
engaged in the circulation of commodities.

The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest form,
implies four extremes, and three dramatic personae. First, a commodity
comes face to face with money; the latter is the form taken by the
value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, in the pocket
of the buyer. A commodity-owner is thus brought into contact with a
possessor of money. So soon, now, as the commodity has been changed
into money, the money becomes its transient equivalent-form, the
use-value of which equivalent-form is to be found in the bodies of
other commodities. Money, the final term of the first transmutation, is
at the same time the starting-point for the second. The person who is a
seller in the first transaction thus becomes a buyer in the second, in
which a third commodity-owner appears on the scene as a seller.3


The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the
metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular movement, a
circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, and return to the
commodity-form. No doubt, the commodity appears here under two
different aspects. At the starting-point it is not a use-value to its
owner; at the finishing point it is. So, too, the money appears in the
first phase as a solid crystal of value, a crystal into which the
commodity eagerly solidifies, and in the second, dissolves into the
mere transient equivalent-form destined to be replaced by a use-value.

The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the same time two
inverse partial metamorphoses of two other commodities. One and the
same commodity, the linen, opens the series of its own metamorphoses,
and completes the metamorphosis of another (the wheat). In the first
phase or sale, the linen plays these two parts in its own person. But,
then, changed into gold, it completes its own second and final
metamorphosis, and helps at the same time to accomplish the first
metamorphosis of a third commodity. Hence the circuit made by one
commodity in the course of its metamorphoses is inextricably mixed up
with the circuits of other commodities. The total of all the different
circuits constitutes "the circulation of commodities".

The circulation of commodities differs from the direct exchange of
products (barter), not only in form, but in substance. Only consider
the course of events. The weaver has, as a matter of fact, exchanged
his linen for a Bible, his own commodity for that of some one else. But
this is true only so far as he himself is concerned. The seller of the
Bible, who prefers something to warm his inside, no more thought of
exchanging his Bible for linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been
exchanged for his linen. B's commodity replaces that of A, but A and B
do not mutually exchange those commodities. It may, of course, happen
that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the other; but
such exceptional transactions are by no means the necessary result of
the general conditions of the circulation of commodities. We see here,
on the one hand, how the exchange of commodities breaks through all
local and personal bounds inseparable from direct barter, and develops
the circulation of the products of social labour; and on the other
hand, how it develops a whole network of social relations spontaneous
in their growth and entirely beyond the control of the actors. It is
only because the farmer has sold his wheat that the weaver is enabled
to sell his linen, only because the weaver has sold his linen that our
Hotspur is enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has
sold the water of everlasting life that the distiller is enabled to
sell his "eau-de-vie", and so on.

The process of circulation, therefore, does not, like direct barter of
products, become extinguished upon the use-values changing places and
hands. The money does not vanish on dropping out of the circuit of the
metamorphosis of a given commodity. It is constantly being precipitated
into new places in the arena of circulation vacated by other
commodities. In the complete metamorphosis of the linen, for example,
linen -- money -- Bible, the linen first falls out of circulation, and
money steps into its place. Then the Bible falls out of circulation,
and again money takes its place. When one commodity replaces another,
the money-commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person.4
Circulation sweats money from every pore.

Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because every sale is
a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the circulation of
commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of sales and purchases.
If this means that the number of actual sales is equal to the number of
purchases, it is mere tautology. But its real purport is to prove that
every seller brings his buyer to market with him. Nothing of the kind.
The sale and the purchase constitute one identical act, an exchange
between a commodity-owner and an owner of money, between two persons as
opposed to each other as the two poles of a magnet. They form two
distinct acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one
single person. Hence the identity of sale and purchase implies that the
commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the alchemistical retort
of circulation, it does not come out again in the shape of money; if,
in other words, it cannot be sold by its owner, and therefore be bought
by the owner of the money. That identity further implies that the
exchange, if it does take place, constitutes a period of rest, an
interval, long or short, in the life "of" the commodity. Since the
first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once a sale and a purchase, it
is also an independent process in itself. The purchaser has the
commodity, the seller has the money, "i.e"., a commodity ready to go
into circulation at any time. No one can sell unless some one else
purchases. But no one is forthwith bound to purchase, because he has
just sold. Circulation bursts through all restrictions as to time,
place, and individuals, imposed by direct barter, and this it effects
by splitting up, into the antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the
direct identity that in barter does exist between the alienation of
one's own and the acquisition of some other man's product. To say that
these two independent and antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity,
are essentially one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic oneness
expresses itself in an external antithesis. If the interval in time
between the two complementary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a
commodity become too great, if the split between the sale and the
purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between them,
their oneness, asserts itself by producing -- a crisis. The antithesis,
use-value and value; the contradictions that private labour is bound to
manifest itself as direct social labour, that a particularised concrete
kind of labour has to pass for abstract human labour; the contradiction
between the personification of objects and the representation of
persons by things; all these antitheses and contradictions, which are
immanent in commodities, assert themselves, and develop their modes of
motion, in the antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity.
These modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the
possibility, of crises. The conversion of this mere possibility into a
reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our
present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. 5


==== B. The currency 6 of money === =

The change of form, C--M--C, by which the circulation of the material
products of labour is brought about, requires that a given value in the
shape of a commodity shall begin the process, and shall, also in the
shape of a commodity, end it. The movement of the commodity is
therefore a circuit. On the other hand, the form of this movement
precludes a circuit from being made by the money. The result is not the
return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away
from its starting-point. So long as the seller sticks fast to his
money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity
is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed
only half its course. But so soon as he completes the process, so soon
as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the
hands of its possessor. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the
Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands. But this
return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen;
that circulation resulted in the money getting into the hands of the
seller of the Bible. The return of money into the hands of the weaver
is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process of
circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends with the
same result as its predecessor did. Hence the movement directly
imparted to money by the circulation of commodities takes the form of a
constant motion away from its starting-point, of a course from the
hands of one commodity-owner into those of another. This course
constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie).

The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the
same process. The commodity is always in the hands of the seller; the
money, as a means of purchase, always in the hands of the buyer. And
money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the
commodity. This realisation transfers the commodity from the seller to
the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer into those
of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with
another commodity. That this one-sided character of the money's motion
arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a
circumstance that is veiled over. The very nature of the circulation of
commodities begets the opposite appearance. The first metamorphosis of
a commodity is visibly, not only the money's movement, but also that of
the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on the contrary, the
movement appears to us as the movement of the money alone. In the first
phase of its circulation the commodity changes place with the money.
Thereupon the commodity, under its aspect of a useful object, falls out
of circulation into consumption.7 In its stead we have its value-shape
-- the money. It then goes through the second phase of its circulation,
not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of money. The
continuity of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and
the same movement that as regards the commodity consists of two
processes of an antithetical character, is, when considered as the
movement of the money, always one and the same process, a continued
change of places with ever fresh commodities. Hence the result brought
about by the circulation of-commodities, namely, the replacing of one
commodity by another, takes the appearance of having been effected not
by means of the change of form of the commodities but rather by the
money acting as a medium of circulation, by an action that circulates
commodities, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and transfers
them from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which
they are use-values; and that in a direction constantly opposed to the
direction of the money. The latter is continually withdrawing
commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in
thus way continually moving further and further from its starting-point
Hence although the movement of the money is merely the expression of
the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the
actual fact, and the circulation of commodities seems to be the result
of the movement of the money.8


Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the
values of commodities have independent reality. Hence its movement, as
the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement of
commodities while changing their forms. This fact must therefore make
itself plainly visible in the currency of money. Thus the linen for
instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its moneyform.
The second term of its first metamorphosis, C--M, the money form, then
becomes the first term of its final metamorphosis, M--C, its
re-conversion into the Bible. But each of these two changes of form is
accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their
"reciprocal displacement". The same pieces of coin come into the
seller's hand "as the alienated form of the commodity" and leave it as
"the absolutely alienable form of the commodity". They are displaced
twice. The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the
weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it. The two inverse
changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the
displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same
pieces of coin.

If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone
through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a given piece
of money changes its place only once. Its second change of place always
expresses the second metamorphosis of the commodity, its re-conversion
from money. The frequent repetition of the displacement of the same
coins reflects not only the series of metamorphoses that a single
commodity has gone through, but also the intertwining of the
innumerable metamorphoses in the world of commodities in general. It is
a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple
circulation of commodities alone, the only form that we are now
considering.

Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes
its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circulation again
and to be replaced by other commodities. Money, on the contrary, as the
medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of
circulation, and moves about in it. The question therefore arises, how
much money this sphere constantly absorbs?

In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in
different localities, numerous one-sided metamorphoses of commodities,
or, in other words, numerous sales and numerous purchases. The
commodities are equated beforehand in imagination, by their prices, to
definite quantities of money. And since, in the form of circulation now
under consideration, money and commodities always come bodily face to
face, one at the positive pole of purchase, the other at the negative
pole of sale, it is clear that the amount of the means of circulation
required, is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all
these commodities. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents
the quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed beforehand by the sum of
the prices of the commodities. The equality of these two sums is
therefore self-evident. We know, however, that, the values of
commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value of
gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and
falling in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of such a
rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of commodities
fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must fall or rise to
the same extent. The change in the quantity of the circulating medium
is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money itself, yet not in
virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, but of its function
as a measure of value. First, the price of the commodities varies
inversely as the value of the money, and then the quantity of the
medium of circulation varies directly as the price of the commodities.
Exactly the same thing would happen if, for instance, instead of the
value of gold falling, gold were replaced by silver as the measure of
value, or if, instead of the value of silver rising, gold were to
thrust silver out from being the measure of value. In the one case,
more silver would be current than gold was before; in the other case,
less gold would be current than silver was before. In each case the
value of the material of money, i. "e"., the value of the commodity
that serves as the measure of value, would have undergone a change, and
therefore so, too, would the prices of commodities which express their
values in money, and so, too, would the quantity of money current whose
function it is to realise those prices. We have already seen, that the
sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or the
material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity with a given
value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a measure of value,
when it expresses prices, its value is already determined. If now its
value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a change in the prices of
those commodities that are directly bartered for the precious metals at
the sources of their production. The greater part of all other
commodities, especially in the imperfectly developed stages of civil
society, will continue for a long time to be estimated by the former
antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. Nevertheless,
one commodity infects another through their common value-relation, so
that their prices, expressed in gold or in silver, gradually settle
down into the proportions determined by their comparative values, until
finally the values of all commodities are estimated in terms of the new
value of the metal that constitutes money. This process is accompanied
by the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, an
increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles directly
bartered for them at their sources of production. In proportion
therefore as commodities in general acquire their true prices, in
proportion as their values become estimated according to the fallen
value of the precious metal, in the same proportion the quantity of
that metal necessary for realising those new prices is provided
beforehand. A one-sided observation of the results that followed upon
the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and silver, led some economists
in the 17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false
conclusion, that the prices of commodities had gone up in consequence
of the increased quantity of gold and silver serving as means of
circulation. Henceforth we shall consider the value of gold to be
given, as, in fact, it is momentarily, whenever we estimate the price
of a commodity.

On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of circulation is
determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised. If now we
further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the
prices clearly depends on the mass of commodities in circulation. It
requires but little racking of brains to comprehend that if one quarter
of wheat costs Pounds 2,100 quarters will cost Pounds 200, 200 quarters
Pounds 400, and so on, that consequently the quantity of money that
changes place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the
quantity of that wheat.

If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circulating
money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of those commodities.
It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices increases or
diminishes in consequence of the change of price. To produce this
effect, it is by no means requisite that the prices of all commodities
should rise or fall simultaneously. A rise or a fall in the prices of a
number of leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to increase,
in the other to diminish, the sum of the prices of all commodities,
and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. Whether the
change in the price correspond to an actual change of value in the
commodities, or whether it be the result of mere fluctuations in
market-prices, the effect on the quantity of the medium of circulation
remains the same. Suppose the following articles to be sold or
partially metamorphosed simultaneously in different localities: say,
one quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of
brandy. If the price of each article be Pounds 2, and the sum of the
prices to be realised be consequently Pounds 8, it follows that Pounds
8 in money must go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these same
articles are links in the following chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter
of wheat -- Pounds 2 -- 20 yards of linen -- Pounds 2 -- 1 Bible --
Pounds 2 -- 4 gallons of brandy -- Pounds 2, a chain that is already
well known to us, in that case the Pounds 2 cause the different
commodities to circulate one after the other, and after realising their
prices successively, and therefore the sum of those prices, Pounds 8,
they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. The Pounds 2
thus make four moves. This repeated change of place of the same pieces
of money corresponds to the double change in form of the commodities,
to their motion in opposite directions through two stages of
circulation. and to the interlacing of the metamorphoses of different
commodities.9 These antithetic and complementary phases, of which the
process of metamorphosis consists, are gone through, not
simultaneously, but successively. Time is therefore required for the
completion of the series. Hence the velocity of the currency of money
is measured by the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a
given time. Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The
sum of the prices to be realised in the day is Pounds 8, the number of
moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of money
circulating is Pounds 2. Hence, for a given interval of time during the
process of circulation, we have the following relation: the quantity of
money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the sum of the
prices of the commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins
of the same denomination. This law holds generally.

The total circulation of commodities in a given country during a given
period is made up on the one hand of numerous isolated and simultaneous
partial metamorphoses, sales which are at the same time purchases, in
which each coin changes its place only once, or makes only one move; on
the other hand, of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly
running side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of
which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number being
greater or less according to circumstances. The total number of moves
made by all the circulating coins of one denomination being given, we
can arrive at the average number of moves made by a single coin of that
denomination, or at the average velocity of the currency of money. The
quantity of money thrown into the circulation at the beginning of each
day is of course determined by the sum of the prices of all the
commodities circulating simultaneously side by side. But once in
circulation, coins are, so to say, made responsible for one another. If
the one increase its velocity, the other either retards its own, or
altogether falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb
only such a quantity of gold as when multiplied by the mean number of
moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the
prices to be realised. Hence if the number of moves made by the
separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in
circulation diminishes. If the number of the moves diminish, the total
number of pieces increases. Since the quantity of money capable of
being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given mean velocity of
currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a given number of
sovereigns from the circulation is to throw the same number of
one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to all bankers.

Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but a reflex of
the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical metamorphoses
they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that currency reflects the
rapidity with which commodities change their forms, the continued
interlacing of one series of metamorphoses with another, the hurried
social interchange of matter, the rapid disappearance of commodities
from the sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substitution of
fresh ones in their places. Hence, in the velocity of the currency we
have the fluent unity of the antithetical and complementary phases, the
unity of the conversion of the useful aspect of commodities into their
value-aspect, and their re-conversion from the latter aspect to the
former, or the unity of the two processes of sale and purchase. On the
other hand, the retardation of the currency reflects the separation of
these two processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the
stagnation in the change of form, and therefore, in the social
interchange of matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue
to the origin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the
phenomenon itself. The general public, who, simultaneously with the
retardation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less
frequently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this
retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium.0

The total quantity of money functioning during a given period as the
circulating medium, is determined, on the one hand, by the sum of the
prices of the circulating commodities, and on the other hand, by the
rapidity with which the antithetical phases of the metamorphoses follow
one another. On this rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the
prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. But the
sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the
quantity, as well as on the prices, of the commodities. These three
factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities,
and velocity of money-currency, are all variable. Hence, the sum of the
prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the circulating
medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous variations of
these three factors in combination. Of these variations we shall
consider those alone that have been the most important in the history
of prices.

While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulating medium
may increase owing to the number of circulating commodities increasing,
or to the velocity of currency decreasing, or to a combination of the
two. On the other hand the quantity of the circulating medium may
decrease with a decreasing number of commodities, or with an increasing
rapidity of their circulation.

With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the
circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of
commodities in circulation decrease proportionally to the increase in
their prices, or provided the velocity of currency increase at the same
rate as prices rise, the number of commodities in circulation remaining
constant. The quantity of the circulating medium may decrease, owing to
the number of commodities decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity
of currency rise.

With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the
circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of
commodities increase proportionally to their fall in price, or provided
the velocity of currency decrease in the same proportion. The quantity
of the circulating medium will increase, provided the number of
commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease
quicker, than the prices fall.

The variations of the different factors may mutually compensate each
other, so that notwithstanding their continued instability, the sum of
the prices to be realised and the quantity of money in circulation
remain constant; consequently, we find, especially if we take long
periods into consideration, that the deviations from the average level,
of the quantity of money current in any country, are much smaller than
we should at first sight expect, apart of course from excessive
perturbations periodically arising from industrial and commercial
crises, or less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money.

The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is determined by
the sum of the prices of the commodities circulating, and the average
velocity of currency1 may also be stated as follows: given the sum of
the values of commodities, and the average rapidity of their
metamorphoses, the quantity of precious metal current as money depends
on the value of that precious metal. The erroneous opinion that it is,
on the contrary, prices that are determined by the quantity of the
circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the quantity of the
precious metals in a country;2 this opinion was based by those who
first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that commodities are without a
price, and money without a value, when they first enter into
circulation, and that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the
medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot part of the heap of
precious metals.3


==== C. Coin and symbols of value === =

That money takes the shape of coin, springs from its function as the
circulating medium. The weight of gold represented in imagination by
the prices or money-names of commodities, must confront those
commodities, within the circulation, in the shape of coins or pieces of
gold of a given denomination. Coining, like the establishment of a
standard of prices, is the business of the State. The different
national uniforms worn at home by gold and silver as coins, and doffed
again in the market of the world, indicate the separation between the
internal or national spheres of the circulation of commodities, and
their universal sphere.

The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is one of
shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to the other. 4 But
no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it immediately finds itself on
the high-road to the melting pot. During their currency, coins wear
away, some more, others less. Name and substance, nominal weight and
real weight, begin their process of separation. Coins of the same
denomination become different in value, because they are different in
weight. The weight of gold fixed upon as the standard of prices,
deviates from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and the
latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the
commodities whose prices it realises. The history of coinage during the
middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever renewed
confusion arising from this cause. The natural tendency of circulation
to convert coins into a mere semblance of what they profess to be, into
a symbol of the weight of metal they are officially supposed to
contain, is recognised by modern legislation, which fixes the loss of
weight sufficient to demonetise a gold coin, or to make it no longer
legal tender.

The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation between
their nominal and their real weight, creating a distinction between
them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and as coins with a
definite function on the other -- this fact implies the latent
possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of some other
material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. The practical
difficulties in the way of coining extremely minute quantities of gold
or silver, and the circumstance that at first the less precious metal
is used as a measure of value instead of the-more precious, copper
instead of silver, silver instead of gold, and that the less precious
circulates as money until dethroned by the more precious -- all these
facts explain the parts historically played by silver and copper tokens
as substitutes for gold coins. Silver and copper tokens take the place
of gold in those regions of the circulation where coins pass from hand
to hand most rapidly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and
tear. This occurs where sales and purchases on a very small scale are
continually happening. In order to prevent these satellites from
establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive
enactments determine the extent to which they must be compulsorily
received as payment instead of gold. The particular tracks pursued by
the different species of coin in currency, run naturally into each
other. The tokens keep company with gold, to pay fractional parts of
the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, constantly pouring
into retail circulation, and on the other hand is as constantly being
thrown out again by being changed into tokens.5


The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbitrarily
fixed by law. When in currency, they wear away even more rapidly than
gold coins. Hence their functions are totally independent of their
weight, and consequently of all value. The function of gold as coin
becomes completely independent of the metallic value of that gold.
Therefore things that are relatively without value, such as paper
notes, can serve as coins in its place. This purely symbolic character
is to a certain extent masked in metal tokens. In paper money it stands
out plainly. In fact, ce n'est que le premier pas qui co√ªte.

We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by the State
and having compulsory circulation. It has its immediate origin in the
metallic currency. Money based upon credit implies on the other hand
conditions, which, from our standpoint of the simple circulation of
commodities, are as yet totally unknown to us. But we may affirm this
much, that just as true paper money takes its rise in the function of
money as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes root
spontaneously in the function of money as the means of payment.6


The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their various
denominations, say Pounds 1, Pounds 5, &c., are printed. In so far as
they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their movement
is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of money itself. A
law peculiar to the circulation of paper money can spring up only from
the proportion in which that paper money represents gold. Such a law
exists; stated simply, it is as follows: the issue of paper money must
not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the case may be) which
would actually circulate if not replaced by symbols. Now the quantity
of gold which the circulation can absorb, constantly-fluctuates about a
given level. Still, the mass of the circulating medium in a given
country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by
actual experience. The fact that this minimum mass continually
undergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces of gold
of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones,
causes of course no change either in its amount or in the continuity of
its circulation. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols. If, on
the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day filled with
paper money to the full extent of their capacity for absorbing money,
they might to-morrow be overflowing in consequence of a fluctuation in
the circulation of commodities. There would no longer be any standard.
If the paper money exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold
coins of the like denomination that can actually be current, it would,
apart from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only
that quantity of gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the
circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone capable of being
represented by paper. If the quantity of paper money issued be double
what it ought to be, then, as a matter of fact, Pounds 1 would be the
money-name not of 1/4 of an ounce, but of 1/8 of an ounce of gold. The
effect would be the same as if an alteration had taken place in the
function of gold as a standard of prices. Those values that were
previously expressed by the price of Pounds 1 would now be expressed by
the price of Pounds 2.

Paper money is a token representing gold or money. The relation between
it and the values of commodities is this, that the latter are ideally
expressed in the same quantities of gold that are symbolically
represented by the paper. Only in so far as paper money represents
gold, which like all other commodities has value, is it a symbol of
value.7


Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being replaced by
tokens that have no value? But, as we have already seen, it is capable
of being so replaced only in so far as it functions exclusively as
coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else. Now, money has
other functions besides this one, and the isolated function of serving
as the mere circulating medium is not necessarily the only one attached
to gold coin, although this is the case with those abraded coins that
continue to circulate. Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of
circulation, only so long as it actually circulates. But this is just
the case with that minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being
replaced by paper money. That mass remains constantly within the sphere
of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and
exists exclusively for that purpose. Its movement therefore represents
nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse phases of the
metamorphosis C--M--C, phases in which commodities confront their
value-forms, only to disappear again immediately. The independent
existence of the exchange-value of a commodity is here a transient
apparition, by means of which the commodity is immediately replaced by
another commodity. Hence, in this process which continually makes money
pass from hand to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money
suffices. Its functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material
existence. Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of
commodities, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore
capable of being replaced by a token.8 One thing is, however,
requisite; this token must have an objective social validity of its
own, and this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. This
compulsory action of the State can take effect only within that inner
sphere of circulation which is coterminous with the territories of the
community, but it is also only within that sphere that money completely
responds to its function of being the circulating medium, or becomes
coin.

=== Section 3: Money == =

The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its
own person or by a representative, as the medium of circulation, is
money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It functions as money, on
the one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person. It is
then the money-commodity, neither merely ideal, as in its function of a
measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function
of circulating medium. On the other hand, it also functions as money,
when by virtue of its function, whether that function be performed in
person or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value,
the only adequate form of existence of exchange-value, in opposition to
use-value, represented by all other commodities.

==== A. Hoarding === =

The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical
metamorphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation of sale
and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, or in the
function that money performs of a "perpetuum mobile" of circulation.
But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is interrupted, so soon as
sales are not supplemented by subsequent purchases, money ceases to be
mobilised; it is transformed, as Boisguillebert says, from 'meuble'
into 'immeuble,' from movable into immovable, from coin into money.

With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodities,
there is also developed the necessity, and the passionate desire, to
hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. This product is the
transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis.9 Commodities
are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order to
replace their commodity-form by their money-form. From being the mere
means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this change of form
becomes the end and aim. The changed form of the commodity is thus
prevented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or as
its merely transient money-form. The money becomes petrified into a
hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money.

In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the
surplus use-values alone that are converted into money. Gold and silver
thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth.
This naive form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communities in
which the traditional mode of production is carried on for the supply
of a fixed and limited circle of home wants. It is thus with the people
of Asia, and particularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, who fancies
that the prices of commodities in a country are determined by the
quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why Indian
commodities are so cheap. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money.
From 1602 to 1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions of pounds
sterling of silver, which originally came from America to Europe.0 In
the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported to India and China
Pounds 120,000,000 in silver, which had been received in exchange for
Australian gold. Most of the silver exported to China makes its way to
India.

As the production of commodities further develops, every producer of
commodities is compelled. to make sure of the nexus rerum or the social
pledge.1 His wants are constantly making themselves felt, and
necessitate the continual purchase of other people's commodities, while
the production and sale of his own goods require time, and depend upon
circumstances. In order then to be able to buy without selling, he must
have sold previously without buying. This operation, conducted on a
general scale, appears to imply a contradiction. But the precious
metals at the sources of their production are directly exchanged for
other commodities. And here we have sales (by the owners of
commodities) without purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). 2 And
subsequent sales, by other producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely
bring about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals
among all the owners of commodities. In this way, all along the line of
exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent are accumulated.
With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the
shape of a particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold. Along
with the extension of circulation, increases the power of money, that
absolutely social form of wealth ever ready for use. 'Gold is a
wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means
of gold one can even get souls into Paradise.' (Columbus in his letter
from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what has been
transformed into it, everything, commodity or not, is convertible into
gold. Everything becomes saleable and buyable. The circulation becomes
the great social retort into which everything is thrown, to come out
again as a gold-crystal. Not even are the bones of saints, and still
less are more delicate res sacrosanctae, extra commercium hominum able
to withstand this alchemy.3 Just as every qualitative difference
between commodities is extinguished in money, so money, on its side,
like the radical leveller that it is, does away with all
distinctions.3a But money itself is a commodity, an external object,
capable of becoming the private property of any individual. Thus social
power becomes the private power of private persons. The ancients
therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order
of things.3b Modern society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus
by the hair of his head from the bowels of the earth,4 greets gold as
its Holy Grail, as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of
its own life.

A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a particular
want, and is a particular element of material wealth. But the value of
a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other
elements of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth
of its owner. To a barbarian owner of commodities, and even to a
West-European peasant, value is the same as value-form, and therefore.
to him the increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in
value. It is true that the value of money varies, at one time in
consequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence
of a change in the values of commodities. But this, on the one hand,
does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from still containing more value
than 100 ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual
metallic form of this article from continuing to be the universal
equivalent form of all other commodities, and the immediate social
incarnation of all human labour. The desire after hoarding is in its
very nature unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally
considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, "i.e"., it is the
universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly
convertible into any other commodity. But, at the same time, every
actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a means of
purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. This antagonism between the
quantitative limits of money and its qualitative boundlessness,
continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like labour
of accumulating. It is with him as it is with a conqueror who sees in
every new country annexed, only a new boundary.

In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it
must be prevented from circulating, or from transforming itself into a
means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the
lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He acts in earnest up to the
Gospel of abstention. On the other hand, he can withdraw from
circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of
commodities. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard
work, saving, and avarice are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues,
and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy.5


By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic
form in the possession of gold and silver articles. This grows with the
wealth of civil society. 'Soyons riches ou paraissons riches'
(Diderot).

In this way there is created, on the one hand, a constantly extending
market for gold and silver, unconnected with their functions as money,
and, on the other hand, a latent source of supply, to which recourse is
had principally in times of crisis and social disturbance.

Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the metallic
circulation. Its first function arises out of the conditions to which
the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We have seen how,
along with the continual fluctuations in the extent and rapidity of the
circulation of commodities and in their prices, the quantity of money
current unceasingly ebbs and flows. This mass must, therefore, be
capable of expansion and contraction. At one time money must be
attracted in order to act as circulating coin, at another, circulating
coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant
money. In order that the mass of money, actually current, may
constantly saturate the absorbing power of the circulation, it is
necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater
than the quantity required to function as coin. This condition is
fulfilled by money taking the form of hoards. These reserves serve as
conduits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the
circulation, which in this way never overflows its banks.6

==== B. Means of Payment === =

In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto
considered, we found a given value always presented to us in a double
shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the opposite pole. The
owners of commodities came therefore into contact as the respective
representatives of what were already equivalents. But with the
development of circulation, conditions arise under which the alienation
of commodities becomes separated, by an interval of time, from the
realisation of their prices. It will be sufficient to indicate the most
simple of these conditions. One sort of article requires a longer,
another a shorter time for its production. Again, the production of
different commodities depends on different seasons of the year. One
sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to
make a long journey to market. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be
ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to buy. When the same transactions
are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of
sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. On
the other hand, the use of a given commodity, of a house, for instance,
is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. Here, it is
only at the end of the term that the buyer has actually received the
use-value of the commodity. He therefore buys it before he pays for it.
The vendor sells an existing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere
representative of money, or rather of future money. The vendor becomes
a creditor, the purchaser becomes a debtor. Since the metamorphosis of
commodities, or the development of their value-form, appears here under
a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; it becomes the
means of payment.

The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple
circulation. The change in the form of that circulation stamps buyer
and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, these new parts are
just as transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are
in turns played by the same actors. But the opposition is not nearly so
pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation.7 The same
characters can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of
commodities. The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form
chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended
in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were displaced by slaves. In
the middle ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal debtors,
who lost their political power together with the economic basis on
which it was established. Nevertheless, the money relation of debtor
and creditor that existed at these two periods reflected only the
deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of
existence of the classes in question.

Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The appearance of the
two equivalents, commodities and money, at the two poles of the process
of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. The money functions now, first
as a measure of value in the determination of the price of the
commodity sold; the price fixed by the contract measures the obligation
of the debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed date.
Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. Although existing
only in the promise of the buyer to pay, it causes the commodity to
change hands. It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means
of payment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the
buyer for that of the seller. The circulating medium was transformed
into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase,
because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, was
withdrawn from circulation. The means of payment enters the
circulation, but only after the commodity has left it. The money is no
longer the means that brings about the process. It only brings it to a
close, by stepping in as the absolute form of existence of
exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. The seller turned his
commodity into money, in order thereby to satisfy some want, the
hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity in its money-shape,
and the debtor in order to be able to pay; if he do not pay, his goods
will be sold by the sheriff. The value-form of commodities, money, is
therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that owing to a social
necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself.

The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned
commodities into money: in other words, he achieves the second
metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The seller's commodity
circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal
claim upon money. It is converted into a use-value before it has been
converted into money. The completion of its first metamorphosis follows
only at a later period.8

The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of
the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave rise to those
obligations. The quantity of gold necessary to realise this sum,
depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the
means of payment. That quantity is conditioned by two circumstances:
first the relations between debtors and creditors form a sort of chain,
in such a way that A, when he receives money from his debtor B,
straightway hands it over to C his creditor, and so on; the second
circumstance is the length of the intervals between the different
due-days of the obligations. The continuous chain of payments, or
retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially different from that
interlacing of the series of metamorphoses which we considered on a
former page. By the currency of the circulating medium, the connexion
between buyers and sellers, is not merely expressed. This connexion is
originated by, and exists in, the circulation alone. Contrariwise, the
movement of the means of payment expresses a social relation that was
in existence long before.

The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by
side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced by the rapidity
of currency. On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in economising
the means of payment. In proportion as payments are concentrated at one
spot, special institutions and methods are developed for their
liquidation. Such in the middle ages were the "virements" at Lyons. The
debts due to A from B, to B from C, to C from A, and so on, have only
to be confronted with each other, in order to annul each other to a
certain extent like positive and negative quantities. There thus
remains only a single balance to pay. The greater the amount of the
payments concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that
amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in
circulation.

The function of money as the means of payment implies a contradiction
without a terminus medius. In so far as the payments balance one
another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a measure
of value. In so far as actual payments have to be made, money does not
serve as a circulating medium, as a mere transient agent in the
interchange of products, but as the individual incarnation of social
labour, as the independent form of existence of exchange-value, as the
universal commodity. This contradiction comes to a head in those phases
of industrial and commercial crises which are known as monetary
crises.9 Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of
payments, and an artificial system of settling them, has been fully
developed. Whenever there is a general and extensive disturbance of
this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money becomes suddenly and
immediately transformed, from its merely ideal shape of money of
account, into hard cash. Profane commodities can no longer replace it.
The use-value of commodities becomes valueless, and their value
vanishes in the presence of its own independent form. On the eve of the
crisis, the bourgeois, with the self-sufficiency that springs from
intoxicating prosperity, declares money to be a vain imagination.
Commodities alone are money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone
is a commodity! As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his soul
after money, the only wealth.0 In a crisis, the antithesis between
commodities and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into an
absolute contradiction. Hence, in such events, the form under which
money appears is of no importance. The money famine continues, whether
payments have to be made in gold or in credit money such as
bank-notes.1

If we now consider the sum total of the money current during a given
period, we shall find that, given the rapidity of currency of the
circulating medium and of the means of payment, it is equal to the sum
of the prices to be realised, plus the sum of the payments falling due,
minus the payments that balance each other, minus finally the number of
circuits in which the same piece of coin serves in turn as means of
circulation and of payment. Hence, even when prices, rapidity of
currency, and the extent of the economy in payments, are given, the
quantity of money current and the mass of commodities circulating
during a given period, such as a day, no longer correspond. Money that
represents commodities long withdrawn from circulation, continues to be
current. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money will not
appear on the scene till some future day. Moreover, the debts
contracted each day, and the payments falling due on the same day, are
quite incommensurable quantities.2


Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money as a means
of payment. Certificates of the debts owing for the purchased
commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to
others. On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit
is extended, so is the function of money as a means of payment. In that
character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it
makes itself at home in the sphere of great commercial transactions.
Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly relegated to the
sphere of retail trade.3


When the production of commodities has sufficiently extended itself,
money begins to serve as the means of payment beyond the sphere of the
circulation of commodities. It becomes the commodity that is the
universal subject-matter of all contracts.4 Rents, taxes, and such like
payments are transformed from payments in kind into money payments. To
what extent this transformation depends upon the general conditions of
production, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman
Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions in money.
The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural population under
Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal
Vauban, and others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but
also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money taxes.5 In Asia, on
the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents
payable in kind, depends on conditions of production that are
reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena. And this mode of
payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production.
It is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. If
the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should lead to the
substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with
the exemplary agriculture of that country. The narrow economic
conditions under which that agriculture is carried on, will be swept
away.

In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recognised
settling days for various large and recurrent payments. These dates
depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduction, on
conditions closely connected with the seasons. They also regulate the
dates for payments that have no direct connexion with the circulation
of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on. The quantity of money
requisite to make the-payments, falling due on those dates all over the
country, causes periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in
the economy of the medium of payment.6

From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of payment, it
follows that the quantity of the means of payment required for all
periodical payments, whatever their source, is in inverse 7 proportion
to the length of their periods.8

The development of money into a medium of payment makes it necessary to
accumulate money against the dates fixed for the payment of the sums
owing. While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring riches, vanishes
with the progress of civil society, the formation of reserves of the
means of payment grows with that progress.

==== C. Universal Money === =

When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips off the
local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard of prices, of coin,
of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its original form
of bullion. In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of
commodities is expressed so as to be universally recognised. Hence
their independent value-form also, in these cases, confronts them under
the shape of universal money. It is only in the markets of the world
that money acquires to the full extent the character of the commodity
whose bodily form is also the immediate social incarnation of human
labour in the abstract. Its real mode of existence in this sphere
adequately corresponds to its ideal concept.

Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one commodity
which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes money. In the markets
of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and silver.9

Money of the world serves as the universal medium of payment, as the
universal means of purchasing, and as the universally recognised
embodiment of all wealth. Its function as a means of payment in the
settling of international balances is its chief one. Hence the
watchword of the mercantilists, balance of trade.0 Gold and silver
serve as international means of purchasing chiefly and necessarily in
those periods when the customary equilibrium in the interchange of
products between different nations is suddenly disturbed. And lastly,
it serves as the universally recognised embodiment of social wealth,
whenever the question is not of buying or paying, but of transferring
wealth from one country to another, and whenever this transference in
the form of commodities is rendered impossible, either by special
conjunctures in the markets or by the purpose itself that is intended.1

Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circulation
so, too, it requires one for external circulation in the markets of the
world. The functions of hoards, therefore, arise in part out of the
function of money, as the medium of the home circulation and home
payments, and in part out of its function of money of the world.2 For
this latter function, the genuine money-commodity, actual gold and
silver, is necessary. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to
distinguish them from their purely local substitutes, calls gold and
silver 'money of the world.'

The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. On the
one hand, it spreads itself from its sources over all the markets of
the world, in order to become absorbed, to various extents, into the
different national spheres of circulation, to fill the conduits of
currency, to replace abraded gold and silver coins, to supply the
material of articles of luxury, and to petrify into hoards.3 This first
current is started by the countries that exchange their labour,
realised in commodities, for the labour embodied in the precious metals
by gold and silver-producing countries. On the other hand, there is a
continual flowing backwards and forwards of gold and silver between the
different national spheres of circulation, a current whose motion
depends on the ceaseless fluctuations in the course of exchange.4

Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is developed to a
certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in the strong rooms of
the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of their
peculiar functions.5 Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their
average level, it is, with some exceptions, an indication of stagnation
in the circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the even flow
of their metamorphoses.6


= Part 2: Transformation of Money into Capital =

== Chapter 4: The General Formula for Capital = =

The circulation of commodities is the starting-point of capital. The
production of commodities, their circulation, and that more developed
form of their circulation called commerce, these form the historical
ground-work from which it rises. The modern history of capital dates
from the creation in the 16th century of a world-embracing commerce and
a world-embracing market.

If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation of
commodities, that is, from the exchange of the various use-values, and
consider only the economic forms produced by this process of
circulation, we find its final result to be money: this final product
of the circulation of commodities is the first form in which capital
appears.

As a matter of history, capital, as opposed to landed property,
invariably takes the form at first of money; it appears as moneyed
wealth, as the capital of the merchant and of the usurer. But we have
no need to refer to the origin of capital in order to discover that the
first form of appearance of capital is money. We can see it daily under
our very eyes. All new capital, to commence with, comes on the stage,
that is, on the market, whether of commodities, labour, or money, even
in our days, in the shape of money that by a definite process has to be
transformed into capital.

The first distinction we notice between money that is money only, and
money that is capital, is nothing more than a difference in their form
of circulation.

The simplest form of the circulation of commodities is C-M-C, the
transformation of commodities into money, and the change of the money
back again into commodities; or selling in order to buy. But alongside
of this form we find another specifically different form: M-C-M, the
transformation of money into commodities, and the change of commodities
back again into money; or buying in order to sell. Money that
circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into, becomes
capital, and is already potentially capital.

Now let us examine the circuit M-C-M a little closer. It consists, like
the other, of two antithetical phases. In the first phase, M-C, or the
purchase, the money is changed into a commodity. In the second phase,
C-M, or the sale, the commodity is changed back again into money. The
combination of these two phases constitutes the single movement whereby
money is exchanged for a commodity, and the same commodity is again
exchanged for money; whereby a commodity is bought in order to be sold,
or, neglecting the distinction in form between buying and selling,
whereby a commodity is bought with money, and then money is bought with
a commodity. The result, in which the phases of the process vanish, is
the exchange of money for money, M-M. If I purchase 2,000 lbs. of
cotton for Pounds 100, and resell the 2,000 lbs. of cotton for Pounds
110, I have, in fact, exchanged Pounds 100 for Pounds 110, money for
money.

Now it is evident that the circuit M-C-M would be absurd and without
meaning if the intention were to exchange by this means two equal sums
of money, Pounds 100 for Pounds 100. The miser's plan would be far
simpler and surer; he sticks to his Pounds 100 instead of exposing it
to the dangers of circulation. And yet, whether the merchant who has
paid Pounds 100 for his cotton sells it for Pounds 110, or lets it go
for Pounds 100, or even Pounds 50, his money has, at all events, gone
through a characteristic and original movement, quite different in kind
from that which it goes through in the hands of the peasant who sells
corn, and with the money thus set free buys clothes. We have therefore
to examine first the distinguishing characteristics of the forms of the
circuits M-C-M and C-M-C, and in doing this the real difference that
underlies the mere difference of form will reveal itself.

Let us see, in the first place, what the two forms have in common.

Both circuits are resolvable into the same two antithetical phases,
C-M, a sale, and M-C, a purchase. In each of these phases the same
material elements - a commodity, and money, and the same economic
dramatis personae, a buyer and a seller - confront one another. Each
circuit is the unity of the same two antithetical phases, and in each
case this unity is brought about by the intervention of three
contracting parties, of whom one only sells, another only buys, while
the third both buys and sells.

What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit C-M-C from
the circuit M-C-M, is the inverted order of succession of the two
phases. The simple circulation of commodities begins with a sale and
ends with a purchase, while the circulation of money as capital begins
with a purchase and ends with a sale. In the one case both the
starting-point and the goal are commodities, in the other they are
money. In the first form the movement is brought about by the
intervention of money, in the second by that of a commodity.

In the circulation C-M-C, the money is in the end converted into a
commodity, that serves as a use-value; it is spent once for all. In the
inverted form, M-C-M, on the contrary, the buyer lays out money in
order that, as a seller, he may recover money. By the purchase of his
commodity he throws money into circulation, in order to withdraw it
again by the sale of the same commodity. He lets the money go, but only
with the sly intention of getting it back again. The money, therefore,
is not spent, it is merely advanced.

In the circuit C-M-C, the same piece of money changes its place twice.
The seller gets it from the buyer and pays it away to another seller.
The complete circulation, which begins with the receipt, concludes with
the payment, of money for commodities. It is the very contrary in the
circuit M-C-M. Here it is not the piece of money that changes its place
twice, but the commodity. The buyer takes it from the hands of the
seller and passes it into the hands of another buyer. Just as in the
simple circulation of commodities the double change of place of the
same piece of money effects its passage from one hand into another, so
here the double change of place of the same commodity brings about the
reflux of the money to its point of departure.

Such reflux is not dependent on the commodity being sold for more than
was paid for it. This circumstance influences only the amount of the
money that comes back. The reflux itself takes place, so soon as the
purchased commodity is resold, in other words, so soon as the circuit
M-C-M is completed. We have here, therefore, a palpable difference
between the circulation of money as capital, and its circulation as
mere money.

The circuit C-M-C comes completely to an end, so soon as the money
brought in by the sale of one commodity is abstracted again by the
purchase of another.

If, nevertheless, there follows a reflux of money to its
starting-point, this can only happen through a renewal or repetition of
the operation. If I sell a quarter of corn for Pounds 3, and with this
Pounds 3 buy clothes, the money, so far as I am concerned, is spent and
done with. It belongs to the clothes merchant. If I now sell a second
quarter of corn, money indeed flows back to me, not however as a sequel
to the first transaction, but in consequence of its repetition. The
money again leaves me, so soon as I complete this second transaction by
a fresh purchase. Therefore, in the circuit C-M-C, the expenditure of
money has nothing to do with its reflux. On the other hand, in M-C-M,
the reflux of the money is conditioned by the very mode of its
expenditure. Without this reflux, the operation fails, or the process
is interrupted and incomplete, owing to the absence of its
complementary and final phase, the sale.

The circuit C-M-C starts with one commodity, and finishes with another,
which falls out of circulation and into consumption. Consumption, the
satisfaction of wants, in one word, use-value, is its end and aim. The
circuit M-C-M, on the contrary, commences with money and ends with
money. Its leading motive, and the goal that attracts it, is therefore
mere exchange-value.

In the simple circulation of commodities, the two extremes of the
circuit have the same economic form. They are both commodities, and
commodities of equal value. But they are also use-values differing in
their qualities, as, for example, corn and clothes. The exchange of
products, of the different materials in which the labour of society is
embodied, forms here the basis of the movement. It is otherwise in the
circulation M-C-M, which at first sight appears purposeless, because
tautological. Both extremes have the same economic form. They are both
money, and therefore are not qualitatively different use-values; for
money is but the converted form of commodities, in which their
particular use-values vanish. To exchange Pounds 100 for cotton, and
then this same cotton again for Pounds 100, is merely a roundabout way
of exchanging money for money, the same for the same, and appears to be
an operation just as purposeless as it is absurd. One sum of money is
distinguishable from another only by its amount. The character and
tendency of the process M-C-M, is therefore not due to any qualitative
difference between its extremes, both being money, but solely to their
quantitative difference. More money is withdrawn from circulation at
the finish than was thrown into it at the start. The cotton that was
bought for Pounds 100 is perhaps resold for Pounds 100 + Pounds 10 or
Pounds 110. The exact form of this process is therefore M-C-M', where
M' = M + D M = the original sum advanced, plus an increment. This
increment or excess over the original value I call 'surplus value.' The
value originally advanced, therefore, not only remains intact while in
circulation, but adds to itself a surplus value or expands itself. It
is this movement that converts it into capital.

Of course, it is also possible, that in C-M-C, the two extremes C-C,
say corn and clothes, may represent different quantities of value. The
farmer may sell his corn above its value, or may buy the clothes at
less than their value. He may, on the other hand, 'be done' by the
clothes merchant. Yet, in the form of circulation now under
consideration, such differences in value are purely accidental. The
fact that the corn and the clothes are equivalents, does not deprive
the process of all meaning, as it does in M-C-M. The equivalence of
their values is rather a necessary condition to its normal course.

The repetition or renewal of the act of selling in order to buy, is
kept within bounds by the very object it aims at, namely, consumption
or the satisfaction of definite wants, an aim that lies altogether
outside the sphere of circulation. But when we buy in order to sell,
we, on the contrary, begin and end with the same thing, money,
exchange-value; and thereby the movement becomes interminable. No
doubt, M becomes M + D M, Pounds 100 become Pounds 110. But when viewed
in their qualitative aspect alone, Pounds 110 are the same as Pounds
100, namely money; and considered quantitatively, Pounds 110 is, like
Pounds 100, a sum of definite and limited value. If now, the Pounds 110
be spent as money, they cease to play their part. They are no longer
capital. Withdrawn from circulation, they become petrified into a
hoard, and though they remained in that state till doomsday, not a
single farthing would accrue to them. If, then, the expansion of value
is once aimed at, there is just the same inducement to augment the
value of the Pounds 110 as that of the Pounds 100; for both are but
limited expressions for exchange-value, and therefore both have the
same vocation to approach, by quantitative increase, as near as
possible to absolute wealth. Momentarily, indeed, the value originally
advanced, the Pounds 100 is distinguishable from the surplus value of
Pounds 10 that is annexed to it during circulation; but the distinction
vanishes immediately. At the end of the process, we do not receive with
one hand the original Pounds 100, and with the other, the surplus value
of Pounds 10. We simply get a value of Pounds 110, which is in exactly
the same condition and fitness for commencing the expanding process, as
the original Pounds 100 was. Money ends the movement only to begin it
again. Therefore, the final result of every separate circuit, in which
a purchase and consequent sale are completed, forms of itself the
starting-point of a new circuit. The simple circulation of commodities
- selling in order to buy - is a means of carrying out a purpose
unconnected with circulation, namely, the appropriation of use-values,
the satisfaction of wants. The circulation of money as capital is, on
the contrary, an end in itself, for the expansion of value takes place
only within this constantly renewed movement. The circulation of
capital has therefore no limits.

As the conscious representative of this movement, the possessor of
money becomes a capitalist. His person, or rather his pocket, is the
point from which the money starts and to which it returns. The
expansion of value, which is the objective basis or main-spring of the
circulation M-C-M, becomes his subjective aim, and it is only in so far
as the appropriation of ever more and more wealth in the abstract
becomes the sole motive of his operations, that he functions as a
capitalist, that is, as capital personified and endowed with
consciousness and a will. Use-values must therefore never be looked
upon as the real aim of the capitalist; neither must the profit on any
single transaction. The restless never-ending process of profit-making
alone is what he aims at. This boundless greed after riches, this
passionate chase after exchange-value, is common to the capitalist and
the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the
capitalist is a rational miser. The never-ending augmentation of
exchange-value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to save0 his
money from circulation, is attained by the more acute capitalist, by
constantly throwing it afresh into circulation.1

The independent form, "i.e.", the money-form, which the value of
commodities assumes in the case of simple circulation, serves only one
purpose, namely, their exchange, and vanishes in the final result of
the movement. On the other hand, in the circulation M-C-M, both the
money and the commodity represent only different modes of existence of
value itself, the money its general mode, and the commodity its
particular, or, so to say, disguised mode.2 It is constantly changing
from one form to the other without thereby becoming lost, and thus
assumes an automatically active character. If now we take in turn each
of the two different forms which self-expanding value successively
assumes in the course of its life, we then arrive at these two
propositions: Capital is money: Capital is commodities.3 In truth,
however, value is here the active factor in a process, in which, while
constantly assuming the form in turn of money and commodities, it at
the same time changes in magnitude, differentiates itself by throwing
off surplus value from itself; the original value, in other words,
expands spontaneously. For the movement, in the course of which it adds
surplus value, is its own movement, its expansion, therefore, is
automatic expansion. Because it is value, it has acquired the occult
quality of being able to add value to itself. It brings forth living
offspring, or, at the least, lays golden eggs.

Value, therefore, being the active factor in such a process, and
assuming at one time the form of money, at another that of commodities,
but through all these changes preserving itself and expanding, it
requires some independent form, by means of which its identity may at
any time be established. And this form it possesses only in the shape
of money. It is under the form of money that value begins and ends, and
begins again, every act of its own spontaneous generation. It began by
being Pounds 100, it is now Pounds 110, and so on. But the money itself
is only one of the two forms of value. Unless it takes the form of some
commodity, it does not become capital. There is here no antagonism, as
in the case of hoarding, between the money and commodities. The
capitalist knows that all commodities, however scurvy they may look, or
however badly they may smell, are in faith and in truth money, inwardly
circumcised Jews, and what is more, a wonderful means whereby out of
money to make more money.

In simple circulation, C-M-C, the value of commodities attained at the
most a form independent of their use-values, "i.e.", the form of money;
but that same value now in the circulation M-C-M, or the circulation of
capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance, endowed
with a motion of its own, passing through a life-process of its own, in
which money and commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts
off in turn. Nay, more: instead of simply representing the relations of
commodities, it enters now, so to say, into private relations with
itself. It differentiates itself as original value from itself as
surplus value; as the father differentiates himself from himself qua
the son, yet both are one and of one age: for only by the surplus value
of Pounds 10 does the Pounds 100 originally advanced become capital,
and so soon as this takes place, so soon as the son, and by the son,
the father, is begotten, so soon does their difference vanish, and they
again become one, Pounds 110.

Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as
such, capital. It comes out of circulation, enters into it again,
preserves and multiplies itself within its circuit, comes back out of
it with expanded bulk, and begins the same round ever afresh.4 M-M',
money which begets money, such is the description of Capital from the
mouths of its first interpreters, the Mercantilists.

Buying in order to sell, or, more accurately, buying in order to sell
dearer, M-C-M', appears certainly to be a form peculiar to one kind of
capital alone, namely, merchants' capital. But industrial capital too
is money, that is changed into commodities, and by the sale of these
commodities, is re-converted into more money. The events that take
place outside the sphere of circulation, in the interval between the
buying and selling, do not affect the form of this movement. Lastly, in
the case of interest-bearing capital, the circulation M-C-M' appears
abridged. We have its result without the intermediate stage, in the
form M-M', 'en style lapidaire' so to say, money that is worth more
money, value that is greater than itself.

M-C-M' is therefore in reality the general formula of capital as it
appears prima facie within the sphere of circulation.

== Chapter 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital = =

The form which circulation takes when money becomes capital, is opposed
to all the laws we have hitherto investigated bearing on the nature of
commodities, value and money, and even of circulation itself. What
distinguishes this form from that of the simple circulation of
commodities, is the inverted order of succession of the two
antithetical processes, sale and purchase. How can this purely formal
distinction between these processes change their character as it were
by magic?

But that is not all. This inversion has no existence for two out of the
three persons who transact business together. As capitalist, I buy
commodities from A and sell them again to B, but as a simple owner of
commodities, I sell them to B and then purchase fresh ones from A. A
and B see no difference between the two sets of transactions. They are
merely buyers or sellers. And I on each occasion meet them as a mere
owner of either money or commodities, as a buyer or a seller, and, what
is more, in both sets of transactions, I am opposed to A only as a
buyer and to B only as a seller, to the one only as money, to the other
only as commodities, and to neither of them as capital or a capitalist,
or as representative of anything that is more than money or
commodities, or that can produce any effect beyond what money and
commodities can. For me the purchase from A and the sale to B are part
of a series. But the connexion between the two acts exists for me
alone. A does not trouble himself about my transaction with B, nor does
B about my business with A. And if I offered to explain to them the
meritorious nature of my action in inverting the order of succession,
they would probably point out to me that I was mistaken as to that
order of succession, and that the whole transaction, instead of
beginning with a purchase and ending with a sale, began, on the
contrary, with a sale and was concluded with a purchase. In truth, my
first act, the purchase, was from the standpoint of A, a sale, and my
second act, the sale, was from the standpoint of B, a purchase. Not
content with that, A and B would declare that the whole series was
superfluous and nothing but Hokus Pokus; that for the future A would
buy direct from B, and B sell direct to A. Thus the whole transaction
would be reduced to a single act forming an isolated, non-complemented
phase in the ordinary circulation of commodities, a mere sale from A's
point of view, and from B's, a mere purchase. The inversion, therefore,
of the order of succession, does not take us outside the sphere of the
simple circulation of commodities, and we must rather look, whether
there is in this simple circulation anything permitting an expansion of
the value that enters into circulation, and, consequently, a creation
of surplus value.

Let us take the process of circulation in a form under which it
presents itself as a simple and direct exchange of commodities. This is
always the case when two owners of commodities buy from each other, and
on the settling day the amounts mutually owing are equal and cancel
each other. The money in this case is money of account and serves to
express the value of the commodities by their prices, but is not,
itself, in the shape of hard cash, confronted with them. So far as
regards use-values, it is clear that both parties may gain some
advantage. Both part with goods that, as use-values, are of no service
to them, and receive others that they can make use of. And there may
also be a further gain. A, who sells wine and buys corn, possibly
produces more wine, with given labour-time, than farmer B could, and B
on the other hand, more corn than wine-grower A could. A, therefore,
may get, for the same exchange-value, more corn, and B more wine, than
each would respectively get without any exchange by producing his own
corn and wine. With reference, therefore, to use-value, there is good
ground for saying that 'exchange is a transaction by which both sides
gain.' It is otherwise with exchange-value. 'A man who has plenty of
wine and no corn treats with a man who has plenty of corn and no wine;
an exchange takes place between them of corn to the value of 50, for
wine of the same value. This act produces no increase of exchange-value
either for the one or the other; for each of them already possessed,
before the exchange, a value equal to that which he acquired by means
of that operation.' The result is not altered by introducing money, as
a medium of circulation, between the commodities, and making the sale
and the purchase two distinct acts. The value of a commodity is
expressed in its price before it goes into circulation, and is
therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its result.

Abstractedly considered, that is, apart from circumstances not
immediately flowing from the laws of the simple circulation of
commodities, there is in an exchange nothing (if we except the
replacing of one use-value by another) but a metamorphosis, a mere
change in the form of the commodity. The same exchange-value, i.e., the
same quantity of incorporated social labour, remains throughout in the
hands of the owner of the commodity, first in the shape of his own
commodity, then in the form of the money for which he exchanged it, and
lastly, in the shape of the commodity he buys with that money. This
change of form does not imply a change in the magnitude of the value.
But the change, which the value of the commodity undergoes in this
process, is limited to a change in its money-form. This form exists
first as the price of the commodity offered for sale, then as an actual
sum of money, which, however, was already expressed in the price, and
lastly, as the price of an equivalent commodity. This change of form no
more implies, taken alone, a change in the quantity of value, than does
the change of a Pounds 5 note into sovereigns, half sovereigns and
shillings. So far therefore as the circulation of commodities effects a
change in the form alone of their values, and is free from disturbing
influences, it must be the exchange of equivalents. Little as
Vulgar-Economy knows about the nature of value, yet whenever it wishes
to consider the phenomena of circulation in their purity, it assumes
that supply and demand are equal, which amounts to this, that their
effect is nil. If therefore, as regards the use-values exchanged, both
buyer and seller may possibly gain something, this is not the case as
regards the exchange-values. Here we must rather say, 'Where equality
exists there can be no gain.' It is true, commodities may be sold at
prices deviating from their values, but these deviations are to be
considered as infractions of the laws of the exchange of commodities,
which in its normal state is an exchange of equivalents, consequently,
no method for increasing value.

Hence, we see that behind all attempts to represent the circulation of
commodities as a source of surplus value, there lurks a "quid pro quo",
a mixing up of use-value and exchange-value. For instance, Condillac
says: 'It is not true that on an exchange of commodities we give value
for value. On the contrary, each of the two contracting parties in
every case, gives a less for a greater value. ... If we really
exchanged equal values, neither party could make a profit. And yet,
they both gain, or ought to gain. Why? The value of a thing consists
solely in its relation to our wants. What is more to the one is less to
the other, and "vice vers√¢". ... It is not to be assumed that we offer
for sale articles required for our own consumption. ... We wish to part
with a useless thing, in order to get one that we need; we want to give
less for more. ... It was natural to think that, in an exchange, value
was given for value, whenever each of the articles exchanged was of
equal value with the same quantity of gold. ... But there is another
point to be considered in our calculation. The question is, whether we
both exchange something superfluous for something necessary.' We see in
this passage, how Condillac not only confuses use-value with
exchange-value, but in a really childish manner assumes, that in a
society, in which the production of commodities is well developed, each
producer produces his own means of subsistence, and throws into
circulation only the excess over his own requirements Still,
Condillac's argument is frequently used by modern economists, more
especially when the point is to show, that the exchange of commodities
in its developed form, commerce, is productive of surplus value. For
instance, 'Commerce ... adds value to products, for the same products
in the hands of consumers, are worth more than in the hands of
producers, and it may strictly be considered an act of production.'0
But commodities are not paid for twice over, once on account of their
use-value, and again on account of their value. And though the
use-value of a commodity is more serviceable to the buyer than to the
seller, its money-form is more serviceable to the seller. Would he
otherwise sell it? We might therefore just as well say that the buyer
performs 'strictly an act of production,' by converting stockings, for
example, into money.

If commodities, or commodities and money, of equal exchange-value, and
consequently equivalents, are exchanged, it is plain that no one
abstracts more value from, than he throws into, circulation. There is
no creation of surplus value. And, in its normal form, the circulation
of commodities demands the exchange of equivalents. But in actual
practice, the process does not retain its normal form. Let us,
therefore, assume an exchange of non-equivalents.

In any case the market for commodities is only frequented by owners of
commodities, and the power which these persons exercise over each
other, is no other than the power of their commodities. The material
variety of these commodities is the material incentive to the act of
exchange, and makes buyers and sellers mutually dependent, because none
of them possesses the object of his own wants, and each holds in his
hand the object of another's wants. Besides these material differences
of their use-values, there is only one other difference between
commodities, namely, that between their bodily form and the form into
which they are converted by sale, the difference between commodities
and money. And consequently the owners of commodities are
distinguishable only as sellers, those who own commodities, and buyers,
those who own money.

Suppose then, that by some inexplicable privilege, the seller is
enabled to sell his commodities above their value, what is worth 100
for 110, in which case the price is nominally raised 10%. The seller
therefore pockets a surplus value of 10. But after he has sold he
becomes a buyer. A third owner of commodities comes to him now as
seller, who in this capacity also enjoys the privilege of selling his
commodities 10% too dear. Our friend gained 10 as a seller only to
lose it again as a buyer.1 The net result is, that all owners of
commodities sell their goods to one another at 10% above their value,
which comes precisely to the same as if they sold them at their true
value. Such a general and nominal rise of prices has the same effect as
if the values had been expressed in weight of silver instead of in
weight of gold. The nominal prices of commodities would rise, but the
real relation between their values would remain unchanged.

Let us make the opposite assumption, that the buyer has the privilege
of purchasing commodities under their value. In this case it is no
longer necessary to bear in mind that he in his turn will become a
seller. He was so before he became buyer; he had already lost 10% in
selling before he gained 10% as buyer.2 Everything is just as it was.
The creation of surplus value, and therefore the conversion of money
into capital, can consequently be explained neither on the assumption
that commodities are sold above their value, nor that they are bought
below their value.3

The problem is in no way simplified by introducing irrelevant matters
after the manner of Col. Torrens: 'Effectual demand consists in the
power and inclination (!), on the part of consumers, to give for
commodities, either by immediate or circuitous barter, some greater
portion of ... capital than their production costs.'4 In relation to
circulation, producers and consumers meet only as buyers and sellers.
To assert that the surplus value acquired by the producer has its
origin in the fact that consumers pay for commodities more than their
value, is only to say in other words: The owner of commodities
possesses, as a seller, the privilege of selling too dear. The seller
has himself produced the commodities or represents their producer, but
the buyer has to no less extent produced the commodities represented by
his money, or represents their producer. The distinction between them
is, that one buys and the other sells. The fact that the owner of the
commodities, under the designation of producer, sells them over their
value, and under the designation of consumer, pays too much for them,
does not carry us a single step further.5

To be consistent therefore, the upholders of the delusion that surplus
value has its origin in a nominal rise of prices or in the privilege
which the seller has of selling too dear, must assume the existence of
a class that only buys and does not sell, i.e., only consumes and does
not produce. The existence of such a class is inexplicable from the
standpoint we have so far reached, viz., that of simple circulation.
But let us anticipate. The money with which such a class is constantly
making purchases, must constantly flow into their pockets, without any
exchange, gratis, by might or right, from the pockets of the
commodity-owners themselves. To sell commodities above their value to
such a class, is only to crib back again a part of the money previously
given to it.6 The towns of Asia Minor thus paid a yearly money tribute
to ancient Rome. With this money Rome purchased from them commodities,
and purchased them too dear. The provincials cheated the Romans, and
thus got back from their conquerors, in the course of trade, a portion
of the tribute. Yet, for all that, the conquered were the really
cheated. Their goods were still paid for with their own money. That is
not the way to get rich or to create surplus value.

Let us therefore keep within the bounds of exchange where sellers are
also buyers, and buyers, sellers. Our difficulty may perhaps have
arisen from treating the actors as personifications instead of as
individuals.

A may be clever enough to get the advantage of B or C without their
being able to retaliate. A sells wine worth Pounds 40 to B, and obtains
from him in exchange corn to the value of Pounds 50. A has converted
his Pounds 40 into Pounds 50, has made more money out of less, and has
converted his commodities into capital. Let us examine this a little
more closely. Before the exchange we had Pounds 40 worth of wine in the
hands of A, and Pounds 50 worth of corn in those of B, a total value of
Pounds 90. After the exchange we have still the same total value of
Pounds 90. The value in circulation has not increased by one iota, it
is only distributed differently between A and B. What is a loss of
value to B is surplus value to A; what is 'minus' to one is 'plus' to
the other. The same change would have taken place, if A, without the
formality of an exchange, had directly stolen the Pounds 10 from B. The
sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be augmented by any
change in their distribution, any more than the quantity of the
precious metals in a country by a Jew selling a Queen Anne's farthing
for a guinea. The capitalist class, as a whole, in any country, cannot
over-reach themselves.7

Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. If
equivalents are exchanged, no surplus value results, and if
non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus value.8 Circulation, or
the exchange of commodities, begets no value.9

The reason is now therefore plain why, in analysing the standard form
of capital, the form under which it determines the economic
organisation of modern society, we entirely left out of consideration
its most popular, and, so to say, antediluvian forms, merchants'
capital and money-lenders' capital.

The circuit M-C-M, buying in order to sell dearer, is seen most clearly
in genuine merchants' capital. But the movement takes place entirely
within the sphere of circulation. Since, however, it is impossible, by
circulation alone, to account for the conversion of money into capital,
for the formation of surplus value, it would appear, that merchants'
capital is an impossibility, so long as equivalents are exchanged;0
that, therefore, it can only have its origin in the two-fold advantage
gained, over both the selling and the buying producers, by the merchant
who parasitically shoves himself in between them. It is in this sense
that Franklin says, 'war is robbery, commerce is generally cheating.'1
If the transformation of merchants' money into capital is to be
explained otherwise than by the producers being simply cheated, a long
series of intermediate steps would be necessary, which, at present,
when the simple circulation of commodities forms our only assumption,
are entirely wanting.

What we have said with reference to merchants' capital, applies still
more to money-lenders' capital. In merchants' capital, the two
extremes, the money that is thrown upon the market, and the augmented
money that is withdrawn from the market, are at least connected by a
purchase and a sale, in other words by the movement of the circulation.
In money-lenders' capital the form M-C-M is reduced to the two extremes
without a mean, M-M , money exchanged for more money, a form that is
incompatible with the nature of money, and therefore remains
inexplicable from the standpoint of the circulation of commodities.
Hence Aristotle: 'since chrematistic is a double science, one part
belonging to commerce, the other to economic, the latter being
necessary and praiseworthy, the former based on circulation and with
justice disapproved (for it is not based on Nature, but on mutual
cheating), therefore the usurer is most rightly hated, because money
itself is the source of his gain, and is not used for the purposes for
which it was invented. For it originated for the exchange of
commodities, but interest makes out of money, more money. Hence its
name (œÑŒøŒ∫ŒøœÇ interest and offspring). For the begotten are like
those who beget them. But interest is money of money, so that of all
modes of making a living, this is the most contrary to Nature.'2

In the course of our investigation, we shall find that both merchants'
capital and interest-bearing capital are derivative forms, and at the
same time it will become clear, why these two forms appear in the
course of history before the modern standard form of capital.

We have shown that surplus value cannot be created by circulation, and,
therefore, that in its formation, something must take place in the
background, which is not apparent in the circulation itself.3 But can
surplus value possibly originate anywhere else than in circulation,
which is the sum total of all the mutual relations of commodity-owners,
as far as they are determined by their commodities? Apart from
circulation, the commodity-owner is in relation only with his own
commodity. So far as regards value, that relation is limited to this,
that the commodity contains a quantity of his own labour, that quantity
being measured by a definite social standard. This quantity is
expressed by the value of the commodity, and since the value is
reckoned in money of account, this quantity is also expressed by the
price, which we will suppose to be Pounds 10. But his labour is not
represented both by the value of the commodity, and by a surplus over
that value, not by a price of 10 that is also a price of 11, not by a
value that is greater than itself. The commodity owner can, by his
labour, create value, but not self-expanding value. He can increase the
value of his commodity, by adding fresh labour, and therefore more
value to the value in hand, by making, for instance, leather into
boots. The same material has now more value, because it contains a
greater quantity of labour. The boots have therefore more value than
the leather, but the value of the leather remains what it was; it has
not expanded itself, has not, during the making of the boots, annexed
surplus value. It is therefore impossible that outside the sphere of
circulation, a producer of commodities can, without coming into contact
with other commodity-owners, expand value, and consequently convert
money or commodities into capital.

It is therefore impossible for capital to be produced by circulation,
and it is equally impossible for it to originate apart from
circulation. It must have its origin both in circulation and yet not in
circulation.

We have, therefore, got a double result.

The conversion of money into capital has to be explained on the basis
of the laws that regulate the exchange of commodities, in such a way
that the starting-point is the exchange of equivalents.4 Our friend,
Moneybags, who as yet is only an embryo capitalist, must buy his
commodities at their value, must sell them at their value, and yet at
the end of the process must withdraw more value from circulation than
he threw into it at starting. His development into a full-grown
capitalist must take place, both within the sphere of circulation and
without it. These are the conditions of the problem. "Hic Rhodus, hic
salta!"5

== Chapter 6: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power = =

The change of value that occurs in the case of money intended to be
converted into capital, cannot take place in the money itself, since in
its function of means of purchase and of payment, it does no more than
realise the price of the commodity it buys or pays for; and, as hard
cash, it is value petrified, never varying. Just as little can it
originate in the second act of circulation, the re-sale of the
commodity, which does no more than transform the article from its
bodily form back again into its money-form. The change must, therefore,
take place in the commodity bought by the first act, M-C, but not in
its value, for equivalents are exchanged, and the commodity is paid for
at its full value. We are, therefore, forced to the conclusion that the
change originates in the use-value, as such, of the commodity, i.e., in
its consumption. In order to be able to extract value from the
consumption of a commodity, our friend, Moneybags, must be so lucky as
to find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity,
whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of
value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an embodiment of
labour, and, consequently, a creation of value. The possessor of money
does find on the market such a special commodity in capacity for labour
or labour-power.

By labour-power or capacity for labour is to be understood the
aggregate of those mental and physical capabilities existing in a human
being, which he exercises whenever he produces a use-value of any
description.

But in order that our owner of money may be able to find labour-power
offered for sale as a commodity, various conditions must first be
fulfilled. The exchange of commodities of itself implies no other
relations of dependence than those which, result from its own nature.
On this assumption, labour-power can appear upon the market as a
commodity, only if, and so far as, its possessor, the individual whose
labour-power it is, offers it for sale, or sells it, as a commodity. In
order that he may be able to do this, he must have it at his disposal,
must be the untrammelled owner of his capacity for labour, i.e., of his
person. He and the owner of money meet in the market, and deal with
each other as on the basis of equal rights, with this difference alone,
that one is buyer, the other seller; both, therefore, equal in the eyes
of the law. The continuance of this relation demands that the owner of
the labour-power should sell it only for a definite period, for if he
were to sell it rump and stump, once for all, he would be selling
himself, converting himself from a free man into a slave, from an owner
of a commodity into a commodity. He must constantly look upon his
labour-power as his own property, his own commodity, and this he can
only do by placing it at the disposal of the buyer temporarily, for a
definite period of time. By this means alone can he avoid renouncing
his rights of ownership over it.

The second essential condition to the owner of money finding
labour-power in the market as a commodity is this -- that the labourer
instead of being in the position to sell commodities in which his
labour is incorporated, must be obliged to offer for sale as a
commodity that very labour-power, which exists only in his living self.

In order that a man may be able to sell commodities other than
labour-power, he must of course have the means of production, as raw
material, implements, &c. No boots can be made without leather. He
requires also the means of subsistence. Nobody -- not even 'a musician
of the future' -- can live upon future products, or upon use-values in
an unfinished state; and ever since the first moment of his appearance
on the world's stage, man always has been, and must still be a
consumer, both before and while he is producing. In a society where all
products assume the form of commodities, these commodities must be sold
after they have been produced, it is only after their sale that they
can serve in satisfying the requirements of their producer. The time
necessary for their sale is superadded to that necessary for their
production.

For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the owner of
money must meet in the market with the free labourer, free in the
double sense, that as a free man he can dispose of his labour-power as
his own commodity, and that on the other hand he has no other commodity
for sale, is short of everything necessary for the realisation of his
labour-power.

The question why this free labourer confronts him in the market, has no
interest for the owner of money, who regards the labour-market as a
branch of the general market for commodities. And for the present it
interests us just as little. We cling to the fact theoretically, as he
does practically. One thing, however, is clear -- Nature does not
produce on the one side owners of money or commodities, and on the
other men possessing nothing but their own labour-power. This relation
has no natural basis, neither is its social basis one that is common to
all historical periods. It is clearly the result of a past historical
development, the product of many economic revolutions, of the
extinction of a whole series of older forms of social production.

So, too, the economic categories, already discussed by us, bear the
stamp of history. Definite historical conditions are necessary that a
product may become a commodity. It must not be produced as the
immediate means of subsistence of the producer himself. Had we gone
further, and inquired under what circumstances all, or even the
majority of products take the form of commodities, we should have found
that this can only happen with production of a very specific kind,
capitalist production. Such an inquiry, however, would have been
foreign to the analysis of commodities. Production and circulation of
commodities can take place, although the great mass of the objects
produced are intended for the immediate requirements of their
producers, are not turned into commodities, and consequently social
production is not yet by a long way dominated in its length and breadth
by exchange-value. The appearance of products as commodities
pre-supposes such a development of the social division of labour, that
the separation of use-value from exchange-value, a separation which
first begins with barter, must already have been completed. But such a
degree of development is common to many forms of society, which in
other respects present the most varying historical features. On the
other hand, if we consider money, its existence implies a definite
stage in the exchange of commodities. The particular functions of money
which it performs, either as the mere equivalent of commodities, or as
means of circulation, or means of payment, as hoard or as universal
money, point, according to the extent and relative preponderance of the
one function or the other, to very different stages in the process of
social production. Yet we know by experience that a circulation of
commodities relatively primitive, suffices for the production of all
these forms. Otherwise with capital. The historical conditions of its
existence are by no means given with the mere circulation of money and
commodities. It can spring into life, only when the owner of the means
of production and subsistence meets in the market with the free
labourer selling his labour-power. And this one historical condition
comprises a world's history. Capital, therefore, announces from its
first appearance a new epoch in the process of social production.

We must now examine more closely this peculiar commodity, labour-power.
Like all others it has a value. How is that value determined?

The value of labour-power is determined, as in the case of every other
commodity, by the labour-time necessary for the production, and
consequently also the reproduction, of this special article. So far as
it has value, it represents no more than a definite quantity of the
average labour of society incorporated in it. Labour-power exists only
as a capacity, or power of the living individual. Its production
consequently pre-supposes his existence. Given the individual, the
production of labour-power consists in his reproduction of himself or
his maintenance. For his maintenance he requires a given quantity of
the means of subsistence. Therefore the labour-time requisite for the
production of labour-power reduces itself to that necessary for the
production of those means of subsistence; in other words, the value of
labour-power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the
maintenance of the labourer. Labour-power, however, becomes a reality
only by its exercise; it sets itself in action only by working. But
thereby a definite quantity of human muscle, nerve. brain, &c., is
wasted, and these require to be restored. This increased expenditure
demands a larger income. If the owner of labour-power works to-day,
to-morrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same
conditions as regards health and strength. His means of subsistence
must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal state as a
labouring individual. His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel,
and housing, vary according to the climatic and other physical
conditions of his country. On the other hand, the number and extent of
his so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them,
are themselves the product of historical development, and depend
therefore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a country,
more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequently on
the habits and degree of comfort in which, the class of free labourers
has been formed. In contradistinction therefore to the case of other
commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of
labour-power a historical and moral element. Nevertheless, in a given
country, at a given period, the average quantity of the means of
subsistence necessary for the labourer is practically known.

The owner of labour-power is mortal. If then his appearance in the
market is to be continuous, and the continuous conversion of money into
capital assumes this, the seller of labour-power must perpetuate
himself, 'in the way that every living individual perpetuates himself,
by procreation.' The labour-power withdrawn from the market by wear and
tear and death, must be continually replaced by, at the very least, an
equal amount of fresh labour-power. Hence the sum of the means of
subsistence necessary for the production of labour-power must include
the means necessary for the labourer's substitutes, i.e., his children,
in order that this race of peculiar commodity-owners may perpetuate its
appearance in the market.

In order to modify the human organism, so that it may acquire skill and
handiness in a given branch of industry, and become labour-power of a
special kind, a special education or training is requisite, and this,
on its part, costs an equivalent in commodities of a greater or less
amount. This amount varies according to the more or less complicated
character of the labour-power. The expenses of this education
(excessively small in the case of ordinary labour-power), enter pro
tanto into the total value spent in its production.

The value of labour-power resolves itself into the value of a definite
quantity of the means of subsistence. It therefore varies with the
value of these means or with the quantity of labour requisite for their
production.

Some of the means of subsistence, such as food and fuel, are consumed
daily, and a fresh supply must be provided daily. Others such as
clothes and furniture last for longer periods and require to be
replaced only at longer intervals. One article must be bought or paid
for daily, another weekly, another quarterly, and so on. But in
whatever way the sum total of these outlays may be spread over the
year, they must be covered by the average income, taking one day with
another. If the total of the commodities required daily for the
production of labour-power = A, and those required weekly = B, and
those required quarterly = C, and so on, the daily average of these
commodities = (365A + 52B + 4C + &c) / 365. Suppose that in this mass
of commodities requisite for the average day there are embodied 6 hours
of social labour, then there is incorporated daily in labour-power half
a day's average social labour, in other words, half a day's labour is
requisite for the daily production of labour-power. This quantity of
labour forms the value of a day's labour-power or the value of the
labour-power daily reproduced. If half a day's average social labour is
incorporated in three shillings, then three shillings is the price
corresponding to the value of a day's labour-power. If its owner
therefore offers it for sale at three shillings a day, its selling
price is equal to its value, and according to our supposition, our
friend Moneybags, who is intent upon converting his three shillings
into capital, pays this value.

The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is determined by the
value of the commodities, without the daily supply of which the
labourer cannot renew his vital energy, consequently by the value of
those means of subsistence that are physically indispensable. If the
price of labour-power fall to this minimum, it falls below its value,
since under such circumstances it can be maintained and developed only
in a crippled state. But the value of every commodity is determined by
the labour-time requisite to turn it out so as to be of normal quality.

It is a very cheap sort of sentimentality which declares this method of
determining the value of labour-power, a method prescribed by the very
nature of the case, to be a brutal method, and which wails with Rossi
that, 'To comprehend capacity for labour (puissance de travail) at the
same time that we make abstraction from the means of subsistence of the
labourers during the process of production, is to comprehend a phantom
(√™tre de raison). When we speak of labour, or capacity for labour, we
speak at the same time of the labourer and his means of subsistence, of
labourer and wages.'0 When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not
speak of labour, any more than when we speak of capacity for digestion,
we speak of digestion. The latter process requires something more than
a good stomach. When we speak of capacity for labour, we do not
abstract from the necessary means of subsistence. On the contrary,
their value is expressed in its value. If his capacity for labour
remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit from it, but rather he
will feel it to be a cruel nature-imposed necessity that this capacity
has cost for its production a definite amount of the means of
subsistence and that it will continue to do so for its reproduction. He
will then agree with Sismondi: 'that capacity for labour ... is nothing
unless it is sold.'1

One consequence of the peculiar nature of labour-power as a commodity
is, that its use-value does not, on the conclusion of the contract
between the buyer and seller, immediately pass into the hands of the
former. Its value, like that of every other commodity, is already fixed
before it goes into circulation, since a definite quantity of social
labour has been spent upon it; but its use-value consists in the
subsequent exercise of its force. The alienation of labour-power and
its actual appropriation by the buyer, its employment as a use-value,
are separated by an interval of time. But in those cases in which the
formal alienation by sale of the use-value of a commodity, is not
simultaneous with its actual delivery to the buyer, the money of the
latter usually functions as means of payment.2 In every country in
which the capitalist mode of production reigns, it is the custom not to
pay for labour-power before it has been exercised for the period fixed
by the contract, as for example, the end of each week. In all cases,
therefore, the use-value of the labour-power is advanced to the
capitalist: the labourer allows the buyer to consume it before he
receives payment of the price; he everywhere gives credit to the
capitalist. That this credit is no mere fiction, is shown not only by
the occasional loss of wages on the bankruptcy of the capitalist,3 but
also by a series of more enduring consequences.4 Nevertheless, whether
money serves as a means of purchase or as a means of payment, this
makes no alteration in the nature of the exchange of commodities. The
price of the labour-power is fixed by the contract, although it is not
realised till later, like the rent of a house. The labour-power is
sold, although it is only paid for at a later period. It will,
therefore, be useful, for a clear comprehension of the relation of the
parties, to assume provisionally, that the possessor of labour-power,
on the occasion of each sale, immediately receives the price stipulated
to be paid for it.

We now know how the value paid by the purchaser to the possessor of
this peculiar commodity, labour-power, is determined. The use-value
which the former gets in exchange, manifests itself only in the actual
utilisation, in the consumption of the labour-power. The money-owner
buys everything necessary for this purpose, such as raw material, in
the market, and pays for it at its full value. The consumption of
labour-power is at one and the same time the production of commodities
and of surplus value. The consumption of labour-power is completed, as
in the case of every other commodity, outside the limits of the market
or of the sphere of circulation. Accompanied by Mr. Moneybags and by
the possessor of labour-power, we therefore take leave for a time of
this noisy sphere, where everything takes place on the surface and in
view of all men, and follow them both into the hidden abode of
production, on whose threshold there stares us in the face 'No
admittance except on business.' Here we shall see, not only how capital
produces, but how capital is produced. We shall at last force the
secret of profit making.

This sphere that we are deserting, within whose boundaries the sale and
purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate
rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and
Bentham. Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commodity, say of
labour-power, are constrained only by their own free will. They
contract as free agents, and the agreement they come to, is but the
form in which they give legal expression to their common will.
Equality, because each enters into relation with the other, as with a
simple owner of commodities, and they exchange equivalent for
equivalent. Property, because each disposes only of what is his own.
And Bentham, because each looks only to himself. The only force that
brings them together and puts them in relation with each other, is the
selfishness, the gain and the private interests of each. Each looks to
himself only, and no one troubles himself about the rest, and just
because they do so, do they all, in accordance with the pre-established
harmony of things, or under the auspices of an all-shrewd providence,
work together to their mutual advantage, for the common weal and in the
interest of all.

On leaving this sphere of simple circulation or of exchange of
commodities, which furnishes the 'Free-trader Vulgaris' with his views
and ideas, and with the standard by which he judges a society based on
capital and wages, we think we can perceive a change in the physiognomy
of our dramatis personae. He, who before was the money-owner, now
strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of labour-power follows
as his labourer. The one with an air of importance, smirking, intent on
business; the other, timid and holding back, like one who is bringing
his own hide to market and has nothing to expect but -- a hiding.

= Part 3: The Production of Absolute Surplus Value =

== Chapter 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus
Value = =

=== Section 1: The Labour-Process or the Production of Use-Values == =

The capitalist buys labour-power in order to use it; and labour-power
in use is labour itself. The purchaser of labour-power consumes it by
setting the seller of it to work. By working, the latter becomes
actually, what before he only was potentially, labour-power in action,
a labourer. In order that his labour may re-appear in a commodity, he
must, before all things, expend it on something useful, on something
capable of satisfying a want of some sort. Hence, what the capitalist
sets the labourer to produce, is a particular use-value, a specified
article. The fact that the production of use-values, or goods, is
carried on under the control of a capitalist and on his behalf, does
not alter the general character of that production. We shall,
therefore, in the first place, have to consider the labour-process
independently of the particular form it assumes under given social
conditions.

Labour is, in the first place, a process in which both man and Nature
participate, and in which man of his own accord starts, regulates, and
controls the material re-actions between himself and Nature. He opposes
himself to Nature as one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and
legs, head and hands, the natural forces of his body, in order to
appropriate Nature's productions in a form adapted to his own wants. By
thus acting on the external world and changing it, he at the same time
changes his own nature. He develops his slumbering powers and compels
them to act in obedience to his sway. We are not now dealing with those
primitive instinctive forms of labour that remind us of the mere
animal. An immeasurable interval of time separates the state of things
in which a man brings his labour-power to market for sale as a
commodity, from that state in which human labour was still in its first
instinctive stage. We pre-suppose labour in a form that stamps it as
exclusively human. A spider conducts operations that resemble those of
a weaver, and a bee puts to shame many an architect in the construction
of her cells. But what distinguishes the worst architect from the best
of bees is this, that the architect raises his structure in imagination
before he erects it in reality. At the end of every labour-process, we
get a result that already existed in the imagination of the labourer at
its commencement. He not only effects a change of form in the material
on which he works, but he also realises a purpose of his own that gives
the law to his modus operandi, and to which he must subordinate his
will. And this subordination is no mere momentary act. Besides the
exertion of the bodily organs, the process demands that, during the
whole operation, the workman's will be steadily in consonance with his
purpose. This means close attention. The less he is attracted by the
nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, and the
less, therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives play to his
bodily and mental powers, the more close his attention is forced to be.

The elementary factors of the labour-process are 1, the personal
activity of man, "i.e"., work itself, 2, the subject of that work, and
3, its instruments.

The soil (and this, economically speaking, includes water) in the
virgin state in which it supplies man with necessaries or the means of
subsistence ready to hand, exists independently of him, and is the
universal subject of human labour. All those things which labour merely
separates from immediate connexion with their environment, are subjects
of labour spontaneously provided by Nature. Such are fish which we
catch and take from their element, water, timber which we fell in the
virgin forest, and ores which we extract from their veins. If, on the
other hand, the subject of labour has, so to say, been filtered through
previous labour, we call it raw material; such is ore already extracted
and ready for washing. All raw material is the subject of labour, but
not every subject of labour is raw material: it can only become so,
after it has undergone some alteration by means of labour.

An instrument of labour is a thing, or a complex of things, which the
labourer interposes between himself and the subject of his labour, and
which serves as the conductor of his activity. He makes use of the
mechanical, physical, and chemical properties of some substances in
order to make other substances subservient to his aims. Leaving out of
consideration such ready-made means of subsistence as fruits, in
gathering which a man's own limbs serve as the instruments of his
labour, the first thing of which the labourer possesses himself is not
the subject of labour but its instrument. Thus Nature becomes one of
the organs of his activity, one that he annexes to his own bodily
organs, adding stature to himself in spite of the Bible. As the earth
is his original larder, so too it is his original tool house. It
supplies him, for instance, with stones for throwing, grinding,
pressing, cutting, &c. The earth itself is an instrument of labour, but
when used as such in agriculture implies a whole series of other
instruments and a comparatively high development of labour. No sooner
does labour undergo the least development, than it requires specially
prepared instruments. Thus in the oldest caves we find stone implements
and weapons. In the earliest period of human history domesticated
animals, "i.e"., animals which have been bred for the purpose, and have
undergone modifications by means of labour, play the chief part as
instruments of labour along with specially prepared stones, wood,
bones, and shells. The use and fabrication of instruments of labour,
although existing in the germ among certain species of animals, is
specifically characteristic of the human labour-process, and Franklin
therefore defines man as a tool-making animal. Relics of bygone
instruments of labour possess the same importance for the investigation
of extinct economic forms of society, as do fossil bones for the
determination of extinct species of animals. It is not the articles
made, but how they are made, and by what instruments, that enables us
to distinguish different economic epochs. Instruments of labour not
only supply a standard of the degree of development to which human
labour has attained, but they are also indicators of the social
conditions under which that labour is carried on. Among the instruments
of labour, those of a mechanical nature, which, taken as a whole, we
may call the bone and muscles of production, offer much more decided
characteristics of a given epoch of production, than those which, like
pipes, tubs, baskets, jars, &c., serve only to hold the materials for
labour, which latter class, we may in a general way, call the vascular
system of production. The latter first begins to play an important part
in the chemical industries.

In a wider sense we may include among the instruments of labour, in
addition to those things that are used for directly transferring labour
to its subject, and which therefore, in one way or another, serve as
conductors of activity, all such objects as are necessary for carrying
on the labour-process. These do not enter directly into the process,
but without them it is either impossible for it to take place at all,
or possible only to a partial extent. Once more we find the earth to be
a universal instrument of this sort, for it furnishes a locus standi to
the labourer and a field of employment for his activity. Among
instruments that are the result of previous labour and also belong to
this class, we find workshops, canals, roads, and so forth.

In the labour-process, therefore, man's activity, with the help of the
instruments of labour, effects an alteration, designed from the
commencement, in the material worked upon. The process disappears in
the product, the latter is a use-value, Nature's material adapted by a
change of form to the wants of man. Labour has incorporated itself with
its subject: the former is materialised, the latter transformed. That
which in the labourer appeared as movement, now appears in the product
as a fixed quality without motion. The blacksmith forges and the
product is a forging.

If we examine the whole process from the point of view of its result,
the product, it is plain that both the instruments and the subject of
labour, are means of production, and that the labour itself is
productive labour.

Though a use-value, in the form of a product, issues from the
labour-process, yet other use-values, products of previous labour,
enter into it as means of production. The same-use-value is both the
product of a previous process, and a means of production in a later
process. Products are therefore not only results, but also essential
conditions of labour.

With the exception of the extractive industries, in which the material
for labour is provided immediately by Nature, such as mining, hunting,
fishing, and agriculture (so far as the latter is confined to breaking
up virgin soil), all branches of industry manipulate raw material,
objects already filtered through labour, already products of labour.
Such is seed in agriculture. Animals and plants, which we are
accustomed to consider as products of Nature, are in their present
form, not only products of, say last year's labour, but the result of a
gradual transformation, continued through many generations, under man's
superintendence, and by means of his labour. But in the great majority
of cases, instruments of labour show even to the most superficial
observer, traces of the labour of past ages.

Raw material may either form the principal substance of a product, or
it may enter into its formation only as an accessory. An accessory may
be consumed by the instruments of labour, as coal under a boiler, oil
by a wheel, hay by draft-horses, or it may be mixed with the raw
material in order to produce some modification thereof, as chlorine
into unbleached linen, coal with iron, dye-stuff with wool, or again,
it may help to carry on the work itself, as in the case of the
materials used for heating and lighting workshops. The distinction
between principal substance and accessory vanishes in the true chemical
industries, because there none of the raw material re-appears, in its
original composition, in the substance of the product.

Every object possesses various properties, and is thus capable of being
applied to different uses. One and the same product may therefore serve
as raw material in very different processes. Corn, for example, is a
raw material for millers, starch-manufacturers, distillers, and
cattlebreeders. It also enters as raw material into its own production
in the shape of seed; coal, too, is at the same time the product of,
and a means of production in, coal-mining.

Again, a particular product may be used in one and the same process,
both as an instrument of labour and as raw material. Take, for
instance, the fattening of cattle, where the animal is the raw
material, and at the same time an instrument for the production of
manure.

A product, though ready for immediate consumption, may yet serve as raw
material for a further product, as grapes when they become the raw
material for wine. On the other hand, labour may give us its product in
such a form, that we can use it only as raw material, as is the case
with cotton, thread, and yarn. Such a raw material, though itself a
product, may have to go through a whole series of different processes:
in each of these in turn, it serves, with constantly varying form, as
raw material, until the last process of the series leaves it a perfect
product, ready for individual consumption, or for use as an instrument
of labour.

Hence we see, that whether a use-value is to be regarded as raw
material, as instrument of labour, or as product, this is determined
entirely by its function in the labour-process, by the position it
there occupies: as this varies, so does its character.

Whenever therefore a product enters as a means of production into a new
labour-process, it thereby loses its character of product, and becomes
a mere factor in the process. A spinner treats spindles only as
implements for spinning, and flax only as the material that he spins.
Of course it is impossible to spin without material and spindles; and
therefore the existence of these things as products, at the
commencement of the spinning operation, must be presumed: but in the
process itself, the fact that they are products of previous labour, is
a matter of utter indifference; just as in the digestive process, it is
of no importance whatever, that bread is the produce of the previous
labour of the farmer, the miller, and the baker. On the contrary, it is
generally by their imperfections as products, that the means of
production in any process assert themselves in their character of
products. A blunt knife or weak thread forcibly remind us of Mr. A.,
the cutler, or Mr. B., the spinner. In the finished product the labour
by means of which it has acquired its useful qualities is not palpable,
has apparently vanished.

A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless. In
addition, it falls a prey to the destructive influence of natural
forces. Iron rusts and wood rots. Yarn with which we neither weave nor
knit, is cotton wasted. Living labour must seize upon these things and
rouse them from their death-sleep, change them from mere possible
use-values into real and effective ones. Bathed in the fire of labour,
appropriated as part and parcel of labour's organism, and, as it were,
made alive for the performance of their functions in the process, they
are in truth consumed, but consumed with a purpose, as elementary
constituents of new use-values, of new products, ever ready as means of
subsistence for individual consumption, or as means of production for
some new labour-process.

If then, on the one hand, finished products are not only results, but
also necessary conditions, of the labour-process, on the other hand,
their assumption into that process, their contact with living labour,
is the sole means by which they can be made to retain their character
of use-values, and be utilised.

Labour uses up its material factors, its subject and its instruments,
consumes them, and is therefore a process of consumption. Such
productive consumption is distinguished from individual consumption by
this, that the latter uses up products, as means of subsistence for the
living individual; the former, as means whereby alone, labour, the
labour-power of the living individual, is enabled to act. The product,
therefore, of individual consumption, is the consumer himself; the
result of productive consumption, is a product distinct from the
consumer.

In so far then, as its instruments and subjects are themselves
products, labour consumes products in order to create products, or in
other words, consumes one set of products by turning them into means of
production for another set. But, just as in the beginning, the only
participators in the labour-process were man and the earth, which
latter exists independently of man, so even now we still employ in the
process many means of production, provided directly by Nature, that do
not represent any combination of natural substances with human labour.

The labour-process, resolved as above into its simple elementary
factors, is human action with a view to the production of use-values,
appropriation of natural substances to human requirements; it is the
necessary condition for effecting exchange of matter between man and
Nature; it is the everlasting Nature-imposed condition of human
existence, and therefore is independent of every social phase of that
existence, or rather, is common to every such phase. It was, therefore,
not necessary to represent our labourer in connexion with other
labourers; man and his labour on one side, Nature and its materials on
the other, sufficed. As the taste of the porridge does not tell you who
grew the oats, no more does this simple process tell you of itself what
are the social conditions under which it is taking place, whether under
the slave-owner's brutal lash, or the anxious eye of the capitalist,
whether Cincinnatus carries it on in tilling his modest farm or a
savage in killing wild animals with stones.

Let us now return to our would-be capitalist. We left him just after he
had purchased, in the open market, all the necessary factors of the
labour process; its objective factors, the means of production, as well
as its subjective factor, labour-power. With the keen eye of an expert,
he has selected the means of production and the kind of labour-power
best adapted to his particular trade, be it spinning, bootmaking, or
any other kind. He then proceeds to consume the commodity, the
labour-power that he has just bought, by causing the labourer, the
impersonation of that labour-power, to consume the means of production
by his labour. The general character of the labour-process is evidently
not changed by the fact, that the labourer works for the capitalist
instead of for himself; moreover, the particular methods and operations
employed in bootmaking or spinning are not immediately changed by the
intervention of the capitalist. He must begin by taking the
labour-power as he finds it in the market, and consequently be
satisfied with labour of such a kind as would be found in the period
immediately preceding the rise of capitalists. Changes in the methods
of production by the subordination of labour to capital, can take place
only at a later period, and therefore will have to be treated of in a
later chapter.

The labour-process, turned into the process by which the capitalist
consumes labour-power, exhibits two characteristic phenomena. First,
the labourer works under the control of the capitalist to whom his
labour belongs; the capitalist taking good care that the work is done
in a proper manner, and that the means of production are used with
intelligence, so that there is no unnecessary waste of raw material,
and no wear and tear of the implements beyond what is necessarily
caused by the work.

Secondly, the product is the property of the capitalist and not that of
the labourer, its immediate producer. Suppose that a capitalist pays
for a day's labour-power at its value; then the right to use that power
for a day belongs to him, just as much as the right to use any other
commodity, such as a horse that he has hired for the day. To the
purchaser of a commodity belongs its use, and the seller of
labour-power, by giving his labour, does no more, in reality, than part
with the use-value that he has sold. From the instant he steps into the
workshop, the use-value of his labour-power, and therefore also its
use, which is labour, belongs to the capitalist. By the purchase of
labour-power, the capitalist incorporates labour, as a living ferment,
with the lifeless constituents of the product. From his point of view,
the labour-process is nothing more than the consumption of the
commodity purchased, "i. e., "of labour-power; but this consumption
cannot be effected except by supplying the labour-power with the means
of production. The labour-process is a process between things that the
capitalist has purchased, things that have become his property. The
product of this process belongs, therefore, to him, just as much as
does the wine which is the product of a process of fermentation
completed in his cellar.0

=== Section 2: The Production of Surplus Value == =

The product appropriated by the capitalist is a use-value, as yarn, for
example, or boots. But, although boots are, in one sense, the basis of
all social progress, and our capitalist is a decided 'progressist,' yet
he does not manufacture boots for their own sake. Use-value is, by no
means, the thing 'qu'on aime pour lui-m√™me' in the production of
commodities. Use-values are only produced by capitalists, because, and
in so far as, they are the material substratum, the depositories of
exchange-value. Our capitalist has two objects in view: in the first
place, he wants to produce a use-value that has a value in exchange,
that is to say, an article destined to be sold, a commodity; and
secondly, he desires to produce a commodity whose value shall be
greater than the sum of the values of the commodities used in its
production, that is, of the means of production and the labour-power,
that he purchased with his good money in the open market. His aim is to
produce not only a use-value, but a commodity also; not only use-value,
but value; not only value, but at the same time surplus value.

It must be borne in mind, that we are now dealing with the production
of commodities, and that, up to this point, we have only considered one
aspect of the process. Just as commodities are, at the same time,
use-values and values, so the process of producing them must be a
labour-process, and at the same time, a process of creating value.1

Let us now examine production as a creation of value.

We know that the value of each commodity is determined by the quantity
of labour expended on and materialised in it, by the working-time
necessary, under given social conditions, for its production. This rule
also holds good in the case of the product that accrued to our
capitalist, as the result of the labour-process carried on for him.
Assuming this product to be 10 lbs. of yarn, our first step is to
calculate the quantity of labour realised in it.

For spinning the yarn, raw material is required; suppose in this case
10 lbs. of cotton. We have no need at present to investigate the value
of this cotton, for our capitalist has, we will assume, bought it at
its full value, say of ten shillings. In this price the labour required
for the production of the cotton is already expressed in terms of the
average labour of society. We will further assume that the wear and
tear of the spindle, which, for our present purpose, may represent all
other instruments of labour employed, amounts to the value of 2s. If,
then, twenty-four hours' labour, or two working days, are required to
produce the quantity of gold represented by twelve shillings, we have
here, to begin with, two days' labour already incorporated in the yarn.

We must not let ourselves be misled by the circumstance that the cotton
has taken a new shape while the substance of the spindle has to a
certain extent been used up. By the general law of value, if the value
of 40 lbs. of yarn = the value of 40 lbs. of cotton + the value of a
whole spindle, "i. e., "if the same working-time is required to produce
the commodities on either side of this equation, then 10 lbs. of yarn
are an equivalent for 10 lbs. of cotton, together with one-fourth of a
spindle. In the case we are considering the same working-time is
materialised in the 10 lbs. of yarn on the one hand, and in the 10 lbs.
of cotton and the fraction of a spindle on the other. Therefore,
whether value appears in cotton, in a spindle, or in yarn, makes no
difference in the amount of that value. The spindle and cotton, instead
of resting quietly side by side, join together in the process, their
forms are altered, and they are turned into yarn; but their value is no
more affected by this fact than it would be if they had been simply
exchanged for their equivalent in yarn.

The labour required for the production of the cotton, the raw material
of the yarn, is part of the labour necessary to produce the yarn, and
is therefore contained in the yarn. The same applies to the labour
embodied in the spindle, without whose wear and tear the cotton could
not be spun.

Hence, in determining the value of the yarn, or the labour-time
required for its production, all the special processes carried on at
various times and in different places, which were necessary, first to
produce the cotton and the wasted portion of the spindle, and then with
the cotton and spindle to spin the yarn, may together be looked on as
different and successive phases of one and the same process. The whole
of the labour in the yarn is past labour; and it is a matter of no
importance that the operations necessary for the production of its
constituent elements were carried on at times which, referred to the
present, are more remote than the final operation of spinning. If a
definite quantity of labour, say thirty days, is requisite to build a
house, the total amount of labour incorporated in it is not altered by
the fact that the work of the last day is done twenty-nine days later
than that of the first. Therefore the labour contained in the raw
material and the instruments of labour can be treated just as if it
were labour expended in an earlier stage of the spinning process,
before the labour of actual spinning commenced.

The values of the means of production, "i. e., "the cotton and the
spindle, which values are expressed in the price of twelve shillings,
are therefore constituent parts of the value of the yarn, or, in other
words, of the value of the product.

Two conditions must nevertheless be fulfilled. First, the cotton and
spindle must concur in the production of a use-value; they must in the
present case become yarn. Value is independent of the particular
use-value by which it is borne, but it must be embodied in a use-value
of some kind. Secondly, the time occupied in the labour of production
must not exceed the time really necessary under the given social
conditions of the case. Therefore, if no more than 1 lb. of cotton be
requisite to spin 1 lbs. of yarn, care must be taken that no more than
this weight of cotton is consumed in the production of 1 lbs. of yarn;
and similarly with regard to the spindle. Though the capitalist have a
hobby, and use a gold instead of a steel spindle, yet the only labour
that counts for anything in the value of the yarn is that which would
be required to produce a steel spindle, because no more is necessary
under the given social conditions.

We now know what portion of the value of the yarn is owing to the
cotton and the spindle. It amounts to twelve shillings or the value of
two days' work. The next point for our consideration is, what portion
of the value of the yarn is added to the cotton by the labour of the
spinner.

We have now to consider this labour under a very different aspect from
that which it had during the labour-process; there, we viewed it solely
as that particular kind of human activity which changes cotton into
yarn; there, the more the labour was suited to the work, the better the
yarn, other circumstances remaining the same. The labour of the spinner
was then viewed as specifically different from other kinds of
productive labour, different on the one hand in its special aim, viz.,
spinning, different, on the other hand, in the special character of its
operations, in the special nature of its means of production and in the
special use-value of its product. For the operation of spinning, cotton
and spindles are a necessity, but for making rifled cannon they would
be of no use whatever. Here, on the contrary, where we consider the
labour of the spinner only so far as it is value-creating, "i.e.", a
source of value, his labour differs in no respect from the labour of
the man who bores cannon, or (what here more nearly concerns us), from
the labour of the cotton-planter and spindle-maker incorporated in the
means of production. It is solely by reason of this identity, that
cotton planting, spindle making and spinning, are capable of forming
the component parts differing only quantitatively from each other, of
one whole, namely, the value of the yarn. Here, we have nothing more to
do with the quality, the nature and the specific character of the
labour, but merely with its quantity. And this simply requires to be
calculated. We proceed upon the assumption that spinning is simple,
unskilled labour, the average labour of a given state of society.
Hereafter we shall see that the contrary assumption would make no
difference.

While the labourer is at work, his labour constantly undergoes a
transformation: from being motion, it becomes an object without motion;
from being the labourer working, it becomes the thing produced. At the
end of one hour's spinning, that act is represented by a definite
quantity of yarn; in other words, a definite quantity of labour, namely
that of one hour, has become embodied in the cotton. We say labour,
"i.e"., the expenditure of his vital force by the spinner, and not
spinning labour, because the special work of spinning counts here, only
so far as it is the expenditure of labour-power in general, and not in
so far as it is the specific work of the spinner.

In the process we are now considering it is of extreme importance, that
no more time be consumed in the work of transforming the cotton into
yarn than is necessary under the given social conditions. If under
normal, "i.e"., average social conditions of production, "a" pounds of
cotton ought to be made into "b" pounds of yarn by one hour's labour,
then a day's labour does not count as 12 hours' labour unless 12 "a"
pounds of cotton have been made into 12 "b" pounds of yarn; for in the
creation of value, the time that is socially necessary alone counts.

Not only the labour, but also the raw material and the product now
appear in quite a new light, very different from that in which we
viewed them in the labour-process pure and simple. The raw material
serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labour. By
this absorption it is in fact changed into yarn, because it is spun,
because labour-power in the form of spinning is added to it; but the
product, the yarn, is now nothing more than a measure of the labour
absorbed by the cotton. If in one hour 1 2/3 lbs. of cotton can be spun
into 1 2/3 lbs. of yarn, then 10 lbs. of yarn indicate the absorption
of 6 hours' labour. Definite quantities of product, these quantities
being determined by experience, now represent nothing but definite
quantities of labour, definite masses of crystallised labour-time. They
are nothing more than the materialisation of so many hours or so many
days of social labour.

We are here no more concerned about the facts, that the labour is the
specific work of spinning, that its subject is cotton and its product
yarn, than we are about the fact that the subject itself is already a
product and therefore raw material. If the spinner, instead of
spinning, were working in a coal mine, the subject of his labour, the
coal, would be supplied by Nature; nevertheless, a definite quantity of
extracted coal, a hundredweight for example, would represent a definite
quantity of absorbed labour.

We assumed, on the occasion of its sale, that the value of a day's
labour-power is three shillings, and that six hours' labour is
incorporated in that sum; and consequently that this amount of labour
is requisite to produce the necessaries of life daily required on an
average by the labourer. If now our spinner by working for one hour,
can convert 1 2/3 lbs. of cotton into 1 2/3 lbs. of yarn, 2 it follows
that in six hours he will convert 10 lbs. of cotton into 10 lbs. of
yarn. Hence, during the spinning process, the cotton absorbs six hours'
labour. The same quantity of labour is also embodied in a piece of gold
of the value of three shillings. Consequently by the mere labour of
spinning, a value of three shillings is added to the cotton.

Let us now consider the total value of the product, the 10 lbs. of
yarn. Two and a half days' labour has been embodied in it, of which two
days were contained in the cotton and in the substance of the spindle
worn away, and half a day was absorbed during the process of spinning.
This two and a half days' labour is also represented by a piece of gold
of the value of fifteen shillings. Hence, fifteen shillings is an
adequate price for the 10 lbs. of yarn, or the price of one pound is
eighteenpence.

Our capitalist stares in astonishment. The value of the product is
exactly equal to the value of the capital advanced. The value so
advanced has not expanded, no surplus value has been created, and
consequently money has not been converted into capital. The price of
the yarn is fifteen shillings, and fifteen shillings were spent in the
open market upon the constituent elements of the product, or, what
amounts to the same thing, upon the factors of the labour-process; ten
shillings were paid for the cotton, two shillings for the substance of
the spindle worn away, and three shillings for the labour-power. The
swollen value of the yarn is of no avail, for it is merely the sum of
the values formerly existing in the cotton, the spindle, and the
labour-power: out of such a simple addition of existing values, no
surplus value can possibly arise.3 These separate values are now all
concentrated in one thing; but so they were also in the sum of fifteen
shillings, before it was split up into three parts, by the purchase of
the commodities.

There is in reality nothing very strange in this result. The value of
one pound of yarn being eighteenpence, if our capitalist buys 10 lbs.
of yarn in the market, he must pay fifteen shillings for them. It is
clear that, whether a man buys his house ready built, or gets it built
for him, in neither case will the mode of acquisition increase the
amount of money laid out on the house.

Our capitalist, who is at home in his vulgar economy, exclaims: ""Oh!
but I advanced my money for the express purpose of making more money.""
The way to Hell is paved with good intentions, and he might just as
easily have intended to make money, without producing at all.4 He
threatens all sorts of things. He won't be caught napping again. In
future he will buy the commodities in the market, instead of
manufacturing them himself. But if all his brother capitalists were to
do the same, where would he find his commodities in the market? And his
money he cannot eat. He tries persuasion. 'Consider my abstinence; I
might have played ducks and drakes with the 15 shillings; but instead
of that I consumed it productively, and made yarn with it.' Very well,
and by way of reward he is now in possession of good yarn instead of a
bad conscience; and as for playing the part of a miser, it would never
do for him to relapse into such bad ways as that; we have seen before
to what results such asceticism leads. Besides, where nothing is, the
king has lost his rights; whatever may be the merit of his abstinence,
there is nothing wherewith specially to remunerate it, because the
value of the product is merely the sum of the values of the commodities
that were thrown into the process of production. Let him therefore
console himself with the reflection that virtue is its own reward, But
no, he becomes importunate. He says: "The yarn is of no use to me: I
produced it for sale." In that case let him sell it, or, still better,
let him for the future produce only things for satisfying his personal
wants, a remedy that his physician MacCulloch has already prescribed as
infallible against an epidemic of over-production. He now gets
obstinate. 'Can the labourer,' he asks, 'merely with his arms and legs,
produce commodities out of nothing? Did I not supply him with the
materials, by means of which, and in which alone, his labour could be
embodied? And as the greater part of society consists of such
ne'er-do-wells, have I not rendered society incalculable service by my
instruments of production, my cotton and my spindle, and not only
society, but the labourer also, whom in addition I have provided with
the necessaries of life? And am I to be allowed nothing in return for
all this service?' Well, but has not the labourer rendered him the
equivalent service of changing his cotton and spindle into yarn?
Moreover, there is here no question of service.5 A service is nothing
more than the useful effect of a use-value, be it of a commodity, or be
it of labour.6 But here we are dealing with exchange-value. The
capitalist paid to the labourer a value of 3 shillings, and the
labourer gave him back an exact equivalent in the value of 3 shillings,
added by him to the cotton: he gave him value for value. Our friend, up
to this time so purse-proud, suddenly assumes the modest demeanour of
his own workman, and exclaims: ""Have I myself not worked? Have I not
performed the labour of superintendence and of overlooking the spinner?
And does not this labour, too, create value?"" His overlooker and his
manager try to hide their smiles. Meanwhile, after a hearty laugh, he
re-assumes his usual mien. Though he chanted to us the whole creed of
the economists, in reality, he says, he would not give a brass farthing
for it. He leaves this and all such like subterfuges and juggling
tricks to the professors of Political Economy, who are paid for it. He
himself is a practical man; and though he does not always consider what
he says outside his business, yet in his business he knows what he is
about.

Let us examine the matter more closely. The value of a day's
labour-power amounts to 3 shillings, because on our assumption half a
day's labour is embodied in that quantity of labour-power, "i.e.",
because the means of subsistence that are daily required for the
production of labour-power, cost half a day's labour. But the past
labour that is embodied in the labour-power, and the living labour that
it can call into action; the daily cost of maintaining it, and its
daily expenditure in work, are two totally different things. The former
determines the exchange-value of the labour-power, the latter is its
use-value. The fact that half a day's labour is necessary to keep the
labourer alive during 24 hours, does not in any way prevent him from
working a whole day. Therefore, the value of labour-power, and the
value which that labour-power creates in the labour-process, are two
entirely different magnitudes; and this difference of the two values
was what the capitalist had in view, when he was purchasing the
labour-power. The useful qualities that labour-power possesses, and by
virtue of which it makes yarn or boots, were to him nothing more than a
conditio sine qua non; for in order to create value, labour must be
expended in a useful manner. What really influenced him was the
specific use-value which this commodity possesses of being "a source
not only of value, but of more value than it has itself. "This is the
special service that the capitalist expects from labour-power, and in
this transaction he acts in accordance with the 'eternal laws' of the
exchange of commodities. The seller of labour-power, like the seller of
any other commodity, realises its exchange-value, and parts with its
use-value. He cannot take the one without giving the other. The
use-value of labour-power, or in other words, labour, belongs just as
little to its seller, as the use-value of oil after it has been sold
belongs to the dealer who has sold it. The owner of the money has paid
the value of a day's labour-power; his, therefore, is the use of it for
a day; a day's labour belongs to him. The circumstance, that on the one
hand the daily sustenance of labour-power costs only half a day's
labour, while on the other hand the very same labour-power can work
during a whole day, that consequently the value which its use during
one day creates, is double what he pays for that use, this circumstance
is, without doubt, a piece of good luck for the buyer, but by no means
an injury to the seller.

Our capitalist foresaw this state of things, and that was the cause of
his laughter. The labourer therefore finds, in the workshop, the means
of production necessary for working, not only during six, but during
twelve hours. Just as during the six hours' process our 10 lbs. of
cotton absorbed six hours' labour, and became 10 lbs. of yarn, so now,
20 lbs. of cotton will absorb 12 hours' labour and be changed into 20
lbs. of yarn. Let us now examine the product of this prolonged process.
There is now materialised in this 20 lbs. of yarn the labour of five
days, of which four days are due to the cotton and the lost steel of
the spindle, the remaining day having been absorbed by the cotton
during the spinning process. Expressed in gold, the labour of five days
is thirty shillings. This is therefore the price of the 20 lbs. of
yarn, giving, as before, eighteenpence as the price of a pound. But the
sum of the values of the commodities that entered into the process
amounts to 27 shillings. The value of the yarn is 30 shillings.
Therefore the value of the product is 1/9 greater than the value
advanced for its production; 27 shillings have been transformed into 30
shillings; a surplus value of 3 shillings has been created. The trick
has at last succeeded; money has been converted into capital.

Every condition of the problem is satisfied, while the laws that
regulate the exchange of commodities, have been in no way violated.
Equivalent has been exchanged for equivalent. For the capitalist as
buyer paid for each commodity, for the cotton, the spindle and the
labour-power, its full value. He then did what is done by every
purchaser of commodities; he consumed their use-value. The consumption
of the labour-power, which was also the process of producing
commodities, resulted in 20 lbs. of yarn, having a value of 30
shillings. The capitalist, formerly a buyer, now returns to market as a
seller, of commodities. He sells his yarn at eighteenpence a pound,
which is its exact value. Yet for all that he withdraws 3 shillings
more from circulation than he originally threw into it. This
metamorphosis, this conversion of money into capital, takes place both
within the sphere of circulation and also outside it; within the
circulation, because conditioned by the purchase of the labour-power in
the market; outside the circulation, because what is done within it is
only a stepping-stone to the production of surplus value, a process
which is entirely confined to the sphere of production. Thus "tout est
pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles" .'

By turning his money into commodities that serve as the material
elements of a new product, and as factors in the labour-process, by
incorporating living labour with their dead substance, the capitalist
at the same time converts value, "i.e.", past, materialised, and dead
labour into capital, into value big with value, a live monster that is
fruitful and multiplies.

If we now compare the two processes of producing value and of creating
surplus value, we see that the latter is nothing but the continuation
of the former beyond a definite point. If on the one hand the process
be not carried beyond the point, where the value paid by the capitalist
for the labour-power is replaced by an exact equivalent, it is simply a
process of producing value; if, on the other hand, it be continued
beyond that point, it becomes a process of creating surplus value.

If we proceed further, and compare the process of producing value with
the labour-process, pure and simple, we find that the latter consists
of the useful labour, the work, that produces use-values. Here we
contemplate the labour as producing a particular article; we view it
under its qualitative aspect alone, with regard to its end and aim. But
viewed as a value-creating process, the same labour-process presents
itself under its quantitative aspect alone. Here it is a question
merely of the time occupied by the labourer in doing the work; of the
period during which the labour-power is usefully expended. Here, the
commodities that take part in the process, do not count any longer as
necessary adjuncts of labour-power in the production of a definite,
useful object. They count merely as depositories of so much absorbed or
materialised labour; that labour, whether previously embodied in the
means of production, or incorporated in them for the first time during
the process by the action of labour-power, counts in either case only
according to its duration; it amounts to so many hours or days as the
case may be.

Moreover, only so much of the time spent in the production of any
article is counted, as, under the given social conditions, is
necessary. The consequences of this are various. In the first place, it
becomes necessary that the labour should be carried on under normal
conditions. If a self-acting mule is the implement in general use for
spinning, it would be absurd to supply the spinner with a distaff and
spinning wheel. The cotton too must not be such rubbish as to cause
extra waste in being worked, but must be of suitable quality. Otherwise
the spinner would be found to spend more time in producing a pound of
yarn than is socially necessary, in which case the excess of time would
create neither value nor money. But whether the material factors of the
process are of normal quality or not, depends not upon the labourer,
but entirely upon the capitalist. Then again, the labour-power itself
must be of average efficacy. In the trade in which it is being
employed, it must possess the average skill, handiness and quickness
prevalent in that trade, and our capitalist took good care to buy
labour-power of such normal goodness. This power must be applied with
the average amount of exertion and with the usual degree of intensity;
and the capitalist is as careful to see that this is done, as that his
workmen are not idle for a single moment. He has bought, the use of the
labour-power for a definite period, and he insists upon his rights. He
has no intention of being robbed. Lastly, and for this purpose our
friend has a penal code of his own, all wasteful consumption of raw
material or instruments of labour is strictly forbidden, because what
is so wasted, represents labour superfluously expended, labour that
does not count in the product or enter into its value.7

We now see, that the difference between labour, considered on the one
hand as producing utilities, and on the other hand, as creating value,
a difference which we discovered by our analysis of a commodity,
resolves itself into a distinction between two aspects of the process
of production.

The process of production, considered on the one hand as the unity of
the labour-process and the process of creating value, is production of
commodities; considered on the other hand as the unity of the
labour-process and the process of producing surplus value, it is the
capitalist process of production, or capitalist production of
commodities.

We stated, on a previous page, that in the creation of surplus value it
does not in the least matter, whether the labour appropriated by the
capitalist be simple unskilled labour of average quality or more
complicated skilled labour. All labour of a higher or more complicated
character than average labour is expenditure of labour-power of a more
costly kind, labour-power whose production has cost more time and
labour, and which therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or
simple labour-power. This power being higher-value, its consumption is
labour of a higher class, labour that creates in equal times
proportionally higher values than unskilled labour does. Whatever
difference in skill there may be between the labour of a spinner and
that of a jeweller, the portion of his labour by which the jeweller
merely replaces the value of his own labour-power, does not in any way
differ in quality from the additional portion by which he creates
surplus value. In the making of jewellery, just as in spinning, the
surplus value results only from a quantitative excess of labour, from a
lengthening-out of one and the same labour-process, in the one case, of
the process of making jewels, in the other of the process of making
yarn.8

But on the other hand, in every process of creating value, the
reduction of skilled labour to average social labour, "e.g.", one day
of skilled to six days of unskilled labour, is unavoidable. 9 We
therefore save ourselves a superfluous operation, and simplify our
analysis, by the assumption, that the labour of the workman employed by
the capitalist is unskilled average labour.

== Chapter 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital = =

The various factors of the labour-process play different parts in
forming the value of the product.

The labourer adds fresh value to the subject of his labour by expending
upon it a given amount of additional labour, no matter what the
specific character and utility of that labour may be. On the other
hand, the values of the means of production used up in the process are
preserved, and present themselves afresh as constituent parts of the
value of the product; the values of the cotton and the spindle, for
instance, re-appear again in the value of the yarn. The value of the
means of production is therefore preserved, by being transferred to the
product. This transfer takes place during the conversion of those means
into a product, or in other words, during the labour-process. It is
brought about by labour; but how?

The labourer does not perform two operations at once, one in order to
add value to the cotton, the other in order to preserve the value of
the means of production, or, what amounts to the same thing, to
transfer to the yarn, to the product, the value of the cotton on which
he works, and part of the value of the spindle with which he works.
But, by the very act of adding new value, he preserves their former
values. Since, however, the addition of new value to the subject of his
labour, and the preservation of its former value, are two entirely
distinct results, produced simultaneously by the labourer, during one
operation, it is plain that this two-fold nature of the result can be
explained only by the two-fold nature of his labour; at one and the
same time, it must in one character create value, and in another
character preserve or transfer value.

Now, in what manner does every labourer add new labour and consequently
new value? Evidently, only by labouring productively in a particular
way; the spinner by spinning, the weaver by weaving, the smith by
forging. But, while thus incorporating labour generally, that is value,
it is by the particular form alone of the labour, by the spinning, the
weaving and the forging respectively, that the means of production, the
cotton and spindle, the yarn and loom, and the iron and anvil become
constituent elements of the product, of a new use-value. Each use-value
disappears, but only to re-appear under a new form in a new use-value.
Now, we saw, when we were considering the process of creating value,
that, if a use-value be effectively consumed in the production of a new
use-value, the quantity of labour expended in the production of the
consumed article, forms a portion of the quantity of labour necessary
to produce the new use-value; this portion is therefore labour
transferred from the means of production to the new product. Hence, the
labourer preserves the values of the consumed means of production, or
transfers them as portions of its value to the product, not by virtue
of his additional labour, abstractedly considered, but by virtue of the
particular useful character of that labour, by virtue of its special
productive form. In so far then as labour is such specific productive
activity, in so far as it is spinning, weaving, or forging, it raises,
by mere contact, the means of production from the dead, makes them
living factors of the labour-process, and combines with them to form
the new products.

If the special productive labour of the workman were not spinning, he
could not convert the cotton into yarn, and therefore could not
transfer the values of the cotton and spindle to the yarn. Suppose the
same workman were to change his occupation to that of a joiner, he
would still by a day's labour add value to the material he works upon.
Consequently, we see, first, that the addition of new value takes place
not by virtue of his labour being spinning in particular, or joinering
in particular, but because it is labour in the abstract, a portion of
the total labour of society; and we see next, that the value added is
of a given definite amount, not because his labour has a special
utility, but because it is exerted for a definite time. On the one
hand, then, it is by virtue of its general character, as being
expenditure of human labour-power in the abstract, that spinning adds
new value to the values of the cotton and the spindle; and on the other
hand, it is by virtue of its special character, as being a concrete,
useful process, that the same labour of spinning both transfers the
values of the means of production to the product, and preserves them in
the product. Hence at one and the same time there is produced a
two-fold result.

By the simple addition of a certain quantity of labour, new value is
added, and by the quality of this added labour, the original values of
the means of production are preserved in the product. This two-fold
effect, resulting from the two-fold character of labour, may be traced
in various phenomena.

Let us assume, that some invention enables the spinner to spin as much
cotton in 6 hours as he was able to spin before in 36 hours. His labour
is now six times as effective as it was, for the purposes of useful
production. The product of 6 hours' work has increased six-fold, from 6
lbs. to 36 lbs. But now the 36 lbs. of cotton absorb only the same
amount of labour as formerly did the 6 lbs. One-sixth as much new
labour is absorbed by each pound of cotton, and consequently, the value
added by the labour to each pound is only one-sixth of what it formerly
was. On the other hand, in the product, in the 36 lbs. of yarn, the
value transferred from the cotton is six times as great as before. By
the 6 hours' spinning, the value of the raw material preserved and
transferred to the product is six times as great as before, although
the new value added by the labour of the spinner to each pound of the
very same raw material is one-sixth what it was formerly. This shows
that the two properties of labour, by virtue of which it is enabled in
one case to preserve value, and in the other to create value, are
essentially different. On the one hand, the longer the time necessary
to spin a given weight of cotton into yarn, the greater is the new
value added to the material; on the other hand, the greater the weight
of the cotton spun in a given time, the greater is the value preserved,
by being transferred from it to the product.

Let us now assume, that the productiveness of the spinner's labour,
instead of varying, remains constant, that he therefore requires the
same time as he formerly did, to convert one pound of cotton into yarn,
but that the exchange-value of the cotton varies, either by rising to
six times its former value or falling to one-sixth of that value. In
both these cases, the spinner puts the same quantity of labour into a
pound of cotton, and therefore adds as much value, as he did before the
change in the value: he also produces a given weight of yarn in the
same time as he did before. Nevertheless, the value that he transfers
from the cotton to the yarn is either one-sixth of what it was before
the variation, or, as the case may be, six times as much as before. The
same result occurs when the value of the instruments of labour rises or
falls, while their useful efficacy in the process remains unaltered.

Again, if the technical conditions of the spinning process remain
unchanged, and no change of value takes place in the means of
production, the spinner continues to consume in equal working-times
equal quantities of raw material, and equal quantities of machinery of
unvarying value. The value that he preserves in the product is directly
proportional to the new value that he adds to the product. In two weeks
he incorporates twice as much labour, and therefore twice as much
value, as in one week, and during the same time he consumes twice as
much material, and wears out twice as much machinery, of double the
value in each case: he therefore preserves, in the product of two
weeks, twice as much value as in the product of one week. So long as
the conditions of production remain the same, the more value the
labourer adds by fresh labour, the more value he transfers and
preserves; but he does so merely because this addition of new value
takes place under conditions that have not varied and are independent
of his own labour. Of course, it may be said in one sense, that the
labourer preserves old value always in proportion to the quantity of
new value that he adds. Whether the value of cotton rise from one
shilling to two shillings, or fall to sixpence, the workman invariably
preserves in the product of one hour only one half as much value as he
preserves in two hours. In like manner, if the productiveness of his
own labour varies by rising or falling, he will in one hour spin either
more or less cotton, as the case may be, than he did before, and will
consequently preserve in the product of one hour, more or less value of
cotton; but, all the same, he will preserve by two hours' labour twice
as much value as he will by one.

Value exists only in articles of utility, in objects: we leave out of
consideration its purely symbolical representation by tokens. (Man
himself, viewed as the impersonation of labour-power, is a natural
object, a thing, although a living conscious thing, and labour is the
manifestation of this power residing in him.) If therefore an article
loses its utility, it also loses its value. The reason why means of
production do not lose their value, at the same time that they lose
their use-value, is this: they lose in the labour-process the original
form of their use-value, only to assume in the product the form of a
new use-value. But, however important it may be to value, that it
should have some object of utility to embody itself in, yet it is a
matter of complete indifference what particular object serves this
purpose; this we saw when treating of the metamorphosis of commodities.
Hence it follows that in the labour-process the means of production
transfer their value to the product only so far as along with their
use-value they lose also their exchange-value. They give up to the
product that value alone which they themselves lose as means of
production. But in this respect the material factors of the
labour-process do not all behave alike.

The coal burnt under the boiler vanishes without leaving a trace; so,
too, the tallow with which the axles of wheels are greased. Dye stuffs
and other auxiliary substances also vanish but re-appear as properties
of the product. Raw material forms the substance of the product, but
only after it has changed its form. Hence raw material and auxiliary
substances lose the characteristic form with which they are clothed on
entering the labour-process. It is otherwise with the instruments of
labour. Tools, machines, workshops, and vessels, are of use in the
labour-process, only so long as they retain their original shape, and
are ready each morning to renew the process with their shape unchanged.
And just as during their lifetime, that is to say, during the continued
labour-process in which they serve, they retain their shape independent
of the product, so, too, they do after their death. The corpses of
machines, tools, workshops, &c., are always separate and distinct from
the product they helped to turn out. If we now consider the case of any
instrument of labour during the whole period of its service, from the
day of its entry into the workshop, till the day of its banishment into
the lumber room, we find that during this period its use-value has been
completely consumed, and therefore its exchange-value completely
transferred to the product. For instance, if a spinning machine lasts
for 10 years, it is plain that during that working period its total
value is gradually transferred to the product of the 10 years. The
lifetime of an instrument of labour, therefore, is spent in the
repetition of a greater or less number of similar operations. Its life
may be compared with that of a human being. Every day brings a man 24
hours nearer to his grave: but how many days he has still to travel on
that road, no man can tell accurately by merely looking at him. This
difficulty, however, does not prevent life insurance offices from
drawing, by means of the theory of averages, very accurate, and at the
same time very profitable conclusions. So it is with the instruments of
labour. It is known by experience how long on the average a machine of
a particular kind will last. Suppose its use-value in the
labour-process to last only six days. Then, on the average, it loses
each day one-sixth of its use-value, and therefore parts with one-sixth
of its value to the daily product. The wear and tear of all
instruments, their daily loss of use-value, and the corresponding
quantity of value they part with to the product, are accordingly
calculated upon this basis.

It is thus strikingly clear, that means of production never transfer
more value to the product than they themselves lose during the
labour-process by the destruction of their own use-value. If such an
instrument has no value to lose, if, in other words, it is not the
product of human labour, it transfers no value to the product. It helps
to create use-value without contributing to the formation of
exchange-value. In this class are included all means of production
supplied by Nature without human assistance, such as land, wind, water,
metals in situ, and timber in virgin forests.

Yet another interesting phenomenon here presents itself. Suppose a
machine to be worth Pounds 1,000, and to wear out in 1,000 days. Then
one thousandth part of the value of the machine is daily transferred to
the day's product. At the same time, though with diminishing vitality,
the machine as a whole continues to take part in the labour-process.
Thus it appears, that one factor of the labour-process, a means of
production, continually enters as a whole into that process, while it
enters into the process of the formation of value by fractions only.
The difference between the two processes is here reflected in their
material factors, by the same instrument of production taking part as a
whole in the labour-process, while at the same time as an element in
the formation of value, it enters only by fractions.

On the other hand, a means of production may take part as a whole in
the formation of value, while into the labour-process it enters only
bit by bit. Suppose that in spinning cotton, the waste for every 115
lbs. used amounts to 15 lbs., which is converted, not into yarn, but
into 'devil's dust.' Now, although this 15 lbs. of cotton never becomes
a constituent element of the yarn, yet assuming this amount of waste to
be normal and inevitable under average conditions of spinning, its
value is just as surely transferred to the value of the yarn, as is the
value of the 100 lbs. that form the substance of the yarn. The
use-value of 15 lbs. of cotton must vanish into dust, before 100 lbs.
of yarn can be made. The destruction of this cotton is therefore a
necessary condition in the production of the yarn. And because it is a
necessary condition, and for no other reason, the value of that cotton
is transferred to the product. The same holds good for every kind of
refuse resulting from a labour-process, so tar at least as such refuse
cannot be further employed as a means in the production of new and
independent use-values. Such an employment of refuse may be seen in the
large machine works at Manchester, where mountains of iron turnings are
carted away to the foundry in the evening, in order the next morning to
re-appear in the workshops as solid masses of iron.

We have seen that the means of production transfer value to the new
product, so far only as during the labour-process they lose value in
the shape of their old use-value. The maximum loss of value that they
can suffer in the process, is plainly limited by the amount of the
original value with which they came into the process, or in other
words, by the labour-time necessary for their production. Therefore,
the means of production can never add more value to the product than
they themselves possess independently of the process in which they
assist. However useful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or
other means of production may be, though it may cost Pounds 150, or,
say, 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any circumstances, add to
the value of the product more than Pounds 150. Its value is determined
not by the labour-process into which it enters as a means of
production, but by that out of which it has issued as a product. In the
labour-process it only serves as a mere use-value, a thing with useful
properties, and could not, therefore, transfer any value to the
product, unless it possessed such value previously.

While productive labour is changing the means of production into
constituent elements of a new product, their value undergoes a
metempsychosis. It deserts the consumed body, to occupy the newly
created one. But this transmigration takes place, as it were, behind
the back of the labourer. He is unable to add new labour, to create new
value, without at the same time preserving old values, and this,
because the labour he adds must be of a specific useful kind; and he
cannot do work of a useful kind, without employing products as the
means of production of a new product, and thereby transferring their
value to the new product. The property therefore which labour-power in
action, living labour, possesses of preserving value, at the same time
that it adds it, is a gift of Nature which costs the labourer nothing,
but which is very advantageous to the capitalist inasmuch as it
preserves the existing value of his capital. So long as trade is good,
the capitalist is too much absorbed in money-grubbing to take notice of
this gratuitous gift of labour. A violent interruption of the
labour-process by a crisis, makes him sensitively aware of it.

As regards the means of production, what is really consumed is their
use-value, and the consumption of this use-value by labour results in
the product. There is no consumption of their value, and it would
therefore be inaccurate to say that it is reproduced. It is rather
preserved; not by reason of any operation it undergoes itself in the
process; but because the article in which it originally exists,
vanishes, it is true, but vanishes into some other article. Hence, in
the value of the product, there is a reappearance of the value of the
means of production, but there is, strictly speaking, no reproduction
of that value. That which is produced is a new use-value in which the
old exchange-value reappears.

It is otherwise with the subjective factor of the labour-process, with
labour-power in action. While the labourer, by virtue of his labour
being of a specialised kind that has a special object, preserves and
transfers to the product the value of the means of production, he at
the same time, by the mere act of working, creates each instant an
additional or new value. Suppose the process of production to be
stopped just when the workman has produced an equivalent for the value
of his own, labour-power, when, for example, by six hours' labour, he
has added a value of three shillings. This value is the surplus, of the
total value of the product, over the portion of its value that is due
to the means of production. It is the only original bit of value formed
during this process, the only portion of the value of the product
created by this process. Of course, we do not forget that this new
value only replaces the money advanced by the capitalist in the
purchase of the labour-power, and spent by the labourer on the
necessaries of life. With regard to the money spent, the new value is
merely a reproduction; but, nevertheless, it is an actual, and not, as
in the case of the value of the means of production, only an apparent,
reproduction. The substitution of one value for another, is here
effected by the creation of new value.

We know, however, from what has gone before, that the labour-process
may continue beyond the time necessary to reproduce and incorporate in
the product a mere equivalent for the value of the labour-power.
Instead of the six hours that are sufficient for the latter purpose,
the process may continue for twelve hours. The action of labour-power,
therefore, not only reproduces its own value, but produces value over
and above it. This surplus value is the difference between the value of
the product and the value of the elements consumed in the formation of
that product, in other words, of the means of production and the
labour-power.

By our explanation of the different parts played by the various factors
of the labour-process in the formation of the product's value, we have,
in fact, disclosed the characters of the different functions allotted
to the different elements of capital in the process of expanding its
own value. The surplus of the total value of the product, over the sum
of the values of its constituent factors, is the surplus of the
expanded capital over the capital originally advanced. The means of
production on the one hand, labour-power on the other, are merely the
different modes of existence which the value of the original capital
assumed when from being money it was transformed into the various
factors of the labour-process. That part of capital then, which is
represented by the means of production, by the raw material, auxiliary
material and the instruments of labour does not, in the process of
production, undergo any quantitative alteration of value. I therefore
call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly, "constant
capital."

On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by labour-power,
does, in the process of production, undergo an alteration of value. It
both reproduces the equivalent of its own value, and also produces an
excess, a surplus value, which may itself vary, may be more or less
according to circumstances. This part of capital is continually being
transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude. I therefore call
it the variable part of capital, or, shortly, "variable capital. "The
same elements of capital which, from the point of view of the
labour-process, present themselves respectively as the objective and
subjective factors, as means of production and labour-power, present
themselves, from the point of view of the process of creating surplus
value, as constant and variable capital.

The definition of constant capital given above by no means excludes the
possibility of a change of value in its elements. Suppose the price of
cotton to be one day sixpence a pound, and the next day, in consequence
of a failure of the cotton crop, a shilling a pound. Each pound of the
cotton bought at sixpence, and worked up after the rise in value,
transfers to the product a value of one shilling; and the cotton
already spun before the rise, and perhaps circulating in the market as
yarn, likewise transfers to the product twice its, original value. It
is plain, however, that these changes of value are independent of the
increment or surplus value added to the value of the cotton by the
spinning itself. If the old cotton had never been spun, it could, after
the rise, be resold at a shilling a pound instead of at sixpence.
Further, the fewer the processes the cotton has gone through, the more
certain is this result. We therefore find that speculators make it a
rule when such sudden changes in value occur, to speculate in that
material on which the least possible quantity of labour has been spent:
to speculate, therefore, in yarn rather than in cloth, in cotton
itself, rather than in yarn. The change of value in the case we have
been considering, originates, not in the process in which the cotton
plays the part of a means of production, and in which it therefore
functions as constant capital, but in the process in which the cotton
itself is produced. The value of a commodity, it is true, is determined
by the quantity of labour contained in it, but this quantity is itself
limited by social conditions. If the time socially necessary for the
production of any commodity alters -- and a given weight of cotton
represents, after a bad harvest, more labour than after a good one --
all previously existing commodities of the same class are affected,
because they are, as it were, only individuals of the species, and
their value at any given time is measured by the labour socially
necessary, "i.e.", by the labour necessary for their production under
the then existing social conditions.

As the value of the raw material may change, so, too, may that of the
instruments of labour, of the machinery, &c., employed in the process;
and consequently that portion of the value of the product transferred
to it from them, may also change. If in consequence of a new invention,
machinery of a particular kind can be produced by a diminished
expenditure of labour, the old machinery becomes depreciated more or
less, and consequently transfers so much less value to the product. But
here again, the change in value originates outside the process in which
the machine is acting as a means of production. Once engaged in this
process, the machine cannot transfer more value than it possesses apart
from the process.

Just as a change in the value of the means of production, even after
they have commenced to take a part in the labour-process, does not
alter their character as constant capital, so, too, a change in the
proportion of constant to variable capital does not affect the
respective functions of these two kinds of capital. The technical
conditions of the labour-process may be revolutionised to such an
extent, that where formerly ten men using ten implements of small value
worked up a relatively small quantity of raw material, one man may now,
with the aid of one expensive machine, work up one hundred times as
much raw material. In the latter case we have an enormous increase in
the constant capital, that is represented by the total value of the
means of production used, and at the same time a great reduction in the
variable capital, invested in labour-power. Such a revolution, however,
alters only the quantitative relation between the constant and the
variable capital, or the proportions in which the total capital is
split up into its constant and variable constituents; it has not in the
least degree affected the essential difference between the two.

== Chapter 9: The Rate of Surplus value = =

=== Section 1: The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power == =

The surplus value generated in the process of production by C, the
capital advanced, or in other words, the self-expansion of the value of
the capital C, presents itself for our consideration, in the first
place, as a surplus, as the amount by which the value of the product
exceeds the value of its constituent elements.

The capital C is made up of two components, one, the sum of money c
laid out upon the means of production, and the other, the sum of money
v expended upon the labour-power; c represents the portion that has
become constant capital, and v the portion that has become variable
capital. At first then, C = c + v: for example, if Pounds 500 is the
capital advanced, its components may be such that the Pounds 500 =
Pounds 410 const. + Pounds 90 var. When the process of production is
finished, we get a commodity whose value = (c + v) + "s", where s is
the surplus value; or taking our former figures, the value of this
commodity may be (Pounds 410 const. + Pounds 90 var.) + Pounds 90
surpl. The original capital has now changed from C to C', from Pounds
500 to Pounds 590. The difference is "s" or a surplus value of Pounds
90. Since the value of the constituent elements of the product is equal
to the value of the advanced capital, it is mere tautology to say, that
the excess of the value of the product over the value of its
constituent elements, is equal to the expansion of the capital advanced
or to the surplus value produced.

Nevertheless, we must examine this tautology a little more closely. The
two things compared are, the value of the product and the value of its
constituents consumed in the process of production. Now we have seen
how that portion of the constant capital which consists of the
instruments of labour, transfers to the production only a fraction of
its value, while the remainder of that value continues to reside in
those instruments. Since this remainder plays no part in the formation
of value, we may at present leave it on one side. To introduce it into
the calculation would make no difference. For instance, taking our
former example, c = Pounds 410: suppose this sum to consist of Pounds
312 value of raw material, Pounds 44 value of auxiliary material, and
Pounds 54 value of the machinery worn away in the process; and suppose
that the total value of the machinery employed is Pounds 1,054. Out of
this latter sum, then, we reckon as advanced for the purpose of turning
out the product, the sum of Pounds 54 alone, which the machinery loses
by wear and tear in the process; for this is all it parts with to the
product. Now if we also reckon the remaining Pounds 1,000, which still
continues in the machinery, as transferred to the product, we ought
also to reckon it as part of the value advanced, and thus make it
appear on both sides of our calculation. We should, in this way, get
Pounds 1,500 on one side and Pounds 1,590 on the other. The difference
of these two sums, or the surplus value, would still be Pounds 90.
Throughout this Book therefore, by constant capital advanced for the
production of value, we always mean, unless the context is repugnant
thereto, the value of the means of production actually consumed in the
process, and that value alone.

This being so, let us return to the formula C = c + v, which we saw was
transformed into C' = (c + v) + s, C becoming C'. We know that the
value of the constant capital is transferred to, and merely re-appears
in the product. The new value actually created in the process, the
value produced, or value-product, is therefore not the same as the
value of the product; it is not, as it would at first sight appear (c +
v) + s or Pounds 410 const. + Pounds 90 var. + Pounds 90 surpl.; but v
+ s or Pounds 90 var. + Pounds 90 surpl., not Pounds 590 but Pounds
180. If c = 0, or in other words, if there were branches of industry in
which the capitalist could dispense with all means of production made
by previous labour, whether they be raw material, auxiliary material,
or instruments of labour, employing only labour-power and materials
supplied by Nature, in that case, there would be no constant capital to
transfer to the product. This component of the value of the product,
"i.e"., the Pounds 410 in our example, would be eliminated, but the sum
of Pounds 180, the amount of new value created, or the value produced,
which contains Pounds 90 of surplus value, would remain just as great
as if c represented the highest value imaginable. We should have C = (0
+ v) = v or C' the expanded capital = v + s and therefore C' - C = s as
before. On the other hand, if s = 0, or in other words, if the
labour-power, whose value is advanced in the form of variable capital,
were to produce only its equivalent, we should have C = c + v or C' the
value of the product = (c + v) + 0 or C = C'. The capital advanced
would, in this case, not have expanded its value.

From what has gone before, we know that surplus value is purely the
result of a variation in the value of v, of that portion of the capital
which is transformed into labour-power; consequently, v + s = v + v, or
v plus an increment of v. But the fact that it is v alone that varies,
and the conditions of that variation, are obscured by the circumstance
that in consequence of the increase in the variable component of the
capital, there is also an increase in the sum total of the advanced
capital. It was originally Pounds 500 and becomes Pounds 590. Therefore
in order that our investigation may lead to accurate results, we must
make abstraction from that portion of the value of the product, in
which constant capital alone appears, and consequently must equate the
constant capital to zero or make c = 0. This is merely an application
of a mathematical rule, employed whenever we operate with constant and
variable magnitudes, related to each other by the symbols of addition
and subtraction only.

A further difficulty is caused by the original form of the variable
capital. In our example, C' = Pounds 410 const. + Pounds 90 var. +
Pounds 90 surpl.; but Pounds 90 is a given and therefore a constant
quantity; hence it appears absurd to treat it as variable. But in fact,
the term Pounds 90 var. is here merely a symbol to show that this value
undergoes a process. The portion of the capital invested in the
purchase of labour-power is a definite quantity of materialised labour,
a constant value like the value of the labour-power purchased. But in
the process of production the place of the Pounds 90 is taken by the
labour-power in action, dead labour is replaced by living labour,
something stagnant by something flowing, a constant by a variable. The
result is the reproduction of v plus an increment of v. From the point
of view then of capitalist production, the whole process appears as the
spontaneous variation of the originally constant value, which is
transformed into labour-power. Both the process and its result, appear
to be owing to this value. If, therefore, such expressions as 'Pounds
90 variable capital,' or 'so much self-expanding value,' appear
contradictory, this is only because they bring to the surface a
contradiction immanent in capitalist production.

At first sight it appears a strange proceeding, to equate the constant
capital to zero. Yet it is what we do every day. If, for example, we
wish to calculate the amount of England's profits from the cotton
industry, we first of all deduct the sums paid for cotton to the United
States, India, Egypt and other countries; in other words, the value of
the capital that merely re-appears in the value of the product, is put
= 0.

Of course the ratio of surplus value not only to that portion of the
capital from which it immediately springs, and whose change of value it
represents, but also to the sum total of the capital advanced is
economically of very great importance. We shall, therefore, in the
third book, treat of this ratio exhaustively. In order to enable one
portion of a capital to expand its value by being converted into
labour-power, it is necessary that another portion be converted into
means of production. In order that variable capital may perform its
function, constant capital must be advanced in proper proportion, a
proportion given by the special technical conditions of each
labour-process. The circumstance, however, that retorts and other
vessels, are necessary to a chemical process, does not compel the
chemist to notice them in the result of his analysis. If we look at the
means of production, in their relation to the creation of value, and to
the variation in the quantity of value, apart from anything else, they
appear simply as the material in which labour-power, the value-creator,
incorporates itself. Neither the nature, nor the value of this material
is of any importance. The only requisite is that there be a sufficient
supply to absorb the labour expended in the process of production. That
supply once given, the material may rise or fall in value, or even be,
as land and the sea, without any value in itself; but this will have no
influence on the creation of value or on the variation in the quantity
of value.

In the first place then we equate the constant capital to zero. The
capital advanced is consequently reduced from c + v to v, and instead
of the value of the product (c + v) + s we have now the value produced
(v + s). Given the new value produced = Pounds 180, which sum
consequently represents the whole labour expended during the process,
then subtracting from it Pounds 90 the value of the variable capital,
we have remaining Pounds 90, the amount of the surplus value. This sum
of Pounds 90 or s expresses the absolute quantity of surplus value
produced. The relative quantity produced, or the increase per cent of
the variable capital, is determined, it is plain, by the ratio of the
surplus value to the variable capital, or is expressed by s/v. In our
example this ratio is 90/90, which gives an increase of 100%. This
relative increase in the value of the variable capital, or the relative
magnitude of the surplus value, I call, 'The rate of surplus value.'

We have seen that the labourer, during one portion of the
labour-process, produces only the value of his labour-power, that is,
the value of his means of subsistence. Now since his work forms part of
a system, based on the social division of labour, he does not directly
produce the actual necessaries which he himself consumes; he produces
instead a particular commodity, yarn for example, whose value is equal
to the value of those necessaries or of the money with which they can
be bought. The portion of his day's labour devoted to this purpose,
will be greater or less, in proportion to the value of the necessaries
that he daily requires on an average, or, what amounts to the same
thing, in proportion to the labour-time required on an average to
produce them. If the value of those necessaries represent on an average
the expenditure of six hours' labour, the workman must on an average
work for six hours to produce that value. If instead of working for the
capitalist, he worked independently on his own account, he would, other
things being equal, still be obliged to labour for the same number of
hours, in order to produce the value of his labour-power, and thereby
to gain the means of subsistence necessary for his conservation or
continued reproduction. But as we have seen, during that portion of his
day's labour in which he produces the value of his labour-power, say
three shillings, he produces only an equivalent for the value of his
labour-power already advanced by the capitalist; the new value created
only replaces the variable capital advanced. It is owing to this fact,
that the production of the new value of three shillings takes the
semblance of a mere reproduction. That portion of the working day,
then, during which this reproduction takes place, I call "necessary"
labour time, and the labour expended during that time I call
"necessary" labour. Necessary, as regards the labourer, because
independent of the particular social form of his labour; necessary, as
regards capital, and the world of capitalists, because on the continued
existence of the labourer depends their existence also.

During the second period of the labour-process, that in which his
labour is no longer necessary labour, the workman, it is true, labours,
expends labour-power; but his labour, being no longer necessary labour,
he creates no value for himself. He creates surplus value which, for
the capitalist, has all the charms of a creation out of nothing. This
portion of the working day, I name surplus labour-time, and to the
labour expended during that time, I give the name of surplus labour. It
is every bit as important, for a correct understanding of surplus
value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of surplus labour-time, as
nothing but materialised surplus labour, as it is, for a proper
comprehension of value, to conceive it as a mere congelation of so many
hours of labour, as nothing but materialised labour. The essential
difference between the various economic forms of society, between, for
instance, a society based on slave-labour, and one based on
wage-labour, lies only in the mode in which this surplus labour is in
each case extracted from the actual producer, the labourer.

Since, on the one hand, the values of the variable capital and of the
labour-power purchased by that capital are equal, and the value of this
labour-power determines the necessary portion of the working day; and
since, on the other hand, the surplus value is determined by the
surplus portion of the working day, it follows that surplus value bears
the same ratio to variable capital, that surplus labour does to
necessary labour, or in other words, the rate of surplus value, s/v =
(surplus labour)/(necessary labour). Both ratios, s/v and (surplus
labour)/(necessary labour), express the same thing in different ways;
in the one case by reference to materialised, incorporated labour, in
the other by reference to living, fluent labour.

The rate of surplus value is therefore an exact expression for the
degree of exploitation of labour-power by capital, or of the labourer
by the capitalist.

We assumed in our example, that the value of the product Pounds 410
const. + Pounds 90 var. + Pounds 90 surpl., and that the capital
advanced = Pounds 500. Since the surplus value = Pounds 90, and the
advanced capital = Pounds 500, we should, according to the usual way of
reckoning, get as the rate of surplus value (generally confounded with
rate of profits) 18%, a rate so low as possibly to cause a pleasant
surprise to Mr. Carey and other harmonisers. But in truth, the rate of
surplus value is not equal to s/C or s/(c+v), but to s/v: thus it is
not 90/500 but 90/90 or 100%, which is more than five times the
apparent degree of exploitation. Although, in the case we have
supposed, we are ignorant of the actual length of the working day, and
of the duration in days or weeks of the labour-process, as also of the
number of labourers employed, yet the rate of surplus value s/v
accurately discloses to us, by means of its equivalent expression,
surplus labour/necessary labour the relation between the two parts of
the working day. This relation is here one of equality, the rate being
100%. Hence, it is plain, the labourer, in our example, works one
half of the day for himself, the other half for the capitalist.

The method of calculating the rate of surplus value is therefore,
shortly, as follows. We take the total value of the product and put the
constant capital which merely re-appears in it, equal to zero. What
remains, is the only value that has, in the process of producing the
commodity, been actually created. If the amount of surplus value be
given, we have only to deduct it from this remainder, to find the
variable capital. And "vice vers√¢, "if the latter be given, and we
require to find the surplus value. If both be given, we have only to
perform the concluding operation, viz., to calculate s/v, the ratio of
the surplus value to the v variable capital.

Though the method is so simple, yet it may not be amiss, by means of a
few examples, to exercise the reader in the application of the novel
principles underlying it.

First we will take the case of a spinning mill containing 10,000 mule
spindles, spinning No. 32 yarn from American cotton, and producing 1
lb. of yarn weekly per spindle. We assume the waste to be 6%: under
these circumstances 10,600 lbs. of cotton are consumed weekly, of which
600 lbs. go to waste. The price of the cotton in April, 1871, was 7d.
per lb.; the raw material therefore costs in round numbers Pounds 342.
The 10,000 spindles, including preparation-machinery, and motive power,
cost, we will assume, Pounds 1 per spindle, amounting to a total of
Pounds 10,000. The wear and tear we put at 10%, or Pounds 1,000
yearly = Pounds 20 weekly. The rent of the building we suppose to be
Pounds 300 a year, or Pounds 6 a week. Coal consumed (for 100
horse-power indicated, at 4 lbs. of coal per horse-power per hour
during 60 hours, and inclusive of that consumed in heating the mill),
11 tons a week at 8s. 6d. a ton, amounts to about Pounds 4 1/2 a week:
gas, Pounds 1 a week, oil, &c., Pounds 4 1/2 a week. Total cost of the
above auxiliary materials, Pounds 10 weekly. Therefore the constant
portion of the value of the week's product is Pounds 378. Wages amount
to Pounds 52 a week. The price of the yarn is 12 p. per. lb. which
gives for the value of 10,000 lbs. the sum of Pounds 510. The surplus
value is therefore in this case Pounds 510 - Pounds 430 = Pounds 80. We
put the constant part of the value of the product = 0, as it plays no
part in the creation of value. There remains Pounds 132 as the weekly
value created, which = Pounds 52 var. + Pounds 80 surpl. The rate of
surplus value is therefore 80/52 = 153 11/13%. In a working day of 10
hours with average labour the result is: necessary labour = 3 31/33
hours, and surplus labour = 6 2/33.

One more example. Jacob gives the following calculation for the year
1815. Owing to the previous adjustment of several items it is very
imperfect; nevertheless for our purpose it is sufficient. In it he
assumes the price of wheat to be 8s. a quarter, and the average yield
per acre to be 22 bushels.




Assuming that the price of the product is the same as its value, we
here find the surplus value distributed under the various heads of
profit, interest, rent, &c. We have nothing to do with these in detail;
we simply add them together, and the sum is a surplus value of Pounds 3
11s. 0d. The sum of Pounds 3 19s. 0d., paid for seed and manure, is
constant capital, and we put it equal to zero. There is left the sum of
Pounds 3 10s. 0d., which is the variable capital advanced: and we see
that a new value of Pounds 3 10s. 0d + Pounds 3 11s. 0d. has been
produced in its place. Therefore s/v = Pounds 3 11s. 0d. / Pounds 3
10s. 0d., giving a rate of surplus value of more than 100%. The
labourer employs more than one half of his working day in producing the
surplus value, which different persons, under different pretexts, share
amongst themselves.

=== Section 2: The Representation of the Components of the Value of the
Product by Corresponding Proportional Parts of the Product Itself == =

Let us now return to the example by which we were shown how the
capitalist converts money into capital.

The product of a working day of 12 hours is 20 lbs. of yarn, having a
value of 30s. No less than 8/10ths of this value, or 24s., is due to
mere re-appearance in it, of the value of the means of production (20
lbs. of cotton, value 20s., and spindle worn away, 4s.): it is
therefore constant capital. The remaining 2/10ths or 6s. is the new
value created during the spinning process: of this one half replaces
the value of the day's labour-power, or the variable capital, the
remaining half constitutes a surplus value of 3s. The total value then
of the 20 lbs. of yarn is made up as follows:

30s. value of yarn = 24s. const. + 3s. var. + 3s. surpl.

Since the whole of this value is contained in the 20 lbs. of yarn
produced, it follows that the various component parts of this value,
can be represented as being contained respectively in corresponding
parts of the product.

If the value of 30s. is contained in 20 lbs. of yarn, then 8/10ths of
this value, or the 24s. that form its constant part, is contained in
8/10ths of the product or in 16 lbs. of yarn. Of the latter 13 1/3 lbs.
represent the value of the raw material, the 20s. worth of cotton spun,
and 2 2/3 lbs. represent the 4s. worth of spindle, &c., worn away in
the process.

Hence the whole of the cotton used up in spinning the 20 lbs. of yarn,
is represented by 13 1/3 lbs. of yarn. This latter weight of yarn
contains, it is true, by weight, no more than 13 1/3 lbs. of cotton,
worth 13 1/3 shillings; but the 6 2/3 shillings additional value
contained in it, are the equivalent for the cotton consumed in spinning
the remaining 6 2/3 lbs. of yarn. The effect is the same as if these 6
2/3 lbs. of yarn contained no cotton at all, and the whole 20 lbs. of
cotton were concentrated in the 13 1/3 lbs. of yarn. The latter weight,
on the other hand, does not contain an atom either of the value of the
auxiliary materials and implements, or of the value newly created in
the process.

In the same way, the 2 2/3 lbs. of yarn, in which the 4s., the
remainder of the constant capital, is embodied, represents nothing but
the value of the auxiliary materials and instruments of labour consumed
in producing the 20 lbs. of yarn.

We have, therefore, arrived at this result: although eight-tenths of
the product, or 16 lbs. of yarn, is, in its character of an article of
utility, just as much the fabric of the spinner's labour, as the
remainder of the same product, yet when viewed in this connexion, it
does not contain, and has not absorbed any labour expended during the
process of spinning. It is just as if the cotton had converted itself
into yarn, without help; as if the shape it had assumed was mere
trickery and deceit: for so soon as our capitalist sells it for 24s.,
and with the money replaces his means of production, it becomes evident
that this 16 lbs. of yarn is nothing more than so much cotton and
spindle-waste in disguise.

On the other hand, the remaining 2/10 ths of the product, or 4 lbs of
yarn, represent nothing but the new value of 6s., created during the 12
hours' spinning process. All the value transferred to those 4 lbs, from
the raw material and instruments of labour consumed, was, so to say,
intercepted in order to be incorporated in the 16 lbs. first spun. In
this case, it is as if the spinner had spun 4 lbs. of yarn out of air,
or, as if he had spun them with the aid of cotton and spindles, that,
being the spontaneous gift of Nature, transferred no value to the
product.

Of this 4 lbs. of yarn, in which the whole of the value newly created
during the process, is condensed, one half represents the equivalent
for the value of the labour consumed, or the 3s. variable capital, the
other half represents the 3s. surplus value.

Since 12 working-hours of the spinner are embodied in 6s., it follows
that in yarn of the value of 30s., there must be embodied 60
working-hours. And this quantity of labour-time does in fact exist in
the 20 lbs of yarn; for in 8/10ths or 16 lbs there are materialised the
48 hours of labour expended, before the commencement of the spinning
process, on the means of production; and in the remaining 2/10ths or 4
lbs there are materialised the 12 hours' work done during the process
itself.

On a former page we saw that the value of the yarn is equal to the sum
of the new value created during the production of that yarn plus the
value previously existing in the means of production.

It has now been shown how the various component parts of the value of
the product, parts that differ functionally from each other, may be
represented by corresponding proportional parts of the product itself.

To split up in this manner the product into different parts, of which
one represents only the labour previously spent on the means of
production, or the constant capital, another, only the necessary labour
spent during the process of production, or the variable capital, and
another and last part, only the surplus labour expended during the same
process, or the surplus value; to do this, is, as will be seen later on
from its application to complicated and hitherto unsolved problems, no
less important than it is simple.

In the preceding investigation we have treated the total product as the
final result, ready for use, of a working day of 12 hours. We can
however follow this total product through all the stages of its
production; and in this way we shall arrive at the same result as
before, if we represent the partial products, given off at the
different stages, as functionally different parts of the final or total
product.

The spinner produces in 12 hours 20 lbs. of yarn, or in 1 hour 1 1/3 lbs;
consequently he produces in 8 hours 13 1/3 lbs., or a partial product
equal in value to all the cotton that is spun in a whole day. In like
manner the partial product of the next period of 1 hour and 36 minutes,
is 2 1/3 lbs. of yarn: this represents the value of the instruments of
labour that are consumed in 12 hours. In the following hour and 12
minutes, the spinner produces 2 lbs. of yarn worth 3 shillings, a value
equal to the whole value he creates in his 6 hours' necessary labour.
Finally, in the last hour and 12 minutes he produces another 2 lbs. of
yarn, whose value is equal to the surplus value, created by his surplus
labour during half a day. This method of calculation serves the English
manufacturer for every-day use; it shows, he will say, that in the
first 8 hours, or  1/3 of the working day, he gets back the value of his
cotton; and so on for the remaining hours. It is also a perfectly
correct method: being in fact the first method given above with this
difference, that instead of being applied to space, in which the
different parts of the completed product lie side by side, it deals
with time, in which those parts are successively produced. But it can
also be accompanied by very barbarian notions, more especially in the
heads of those who are as much interested, practically, in the process
of making value beget value, as they are in misunderstanding that
process theoretically. Such people may get the notion into their heads,
that our spinner, for example, produces or replaces in the first 8
hours of his working day the "value "of the cotton; in the following
hour and 36 minutes the "value "of the instruments of labour worn away;
in the next hour and 12 minutes the "value "of the wages; and that he
devotes to the production of surplus value for the manufacturer, only
that well known 'last hour.' In this way the poor spinner is made to
perform the two-fold miracle not only of producing cotton, spindles,
steam-engine, coal, oil, &c., at the same time that he spins with them,
but also of turning one working day into five; for, in the example we
are considering, the production of the raw material and instruments of
labour demands four working days of twelve hours each, and their
conversion into yarn requires another such day. That the love of lucre
induces an easy belief in such miracles, and that sycophant
doctrinaires are never wanting to prove them, is vouched for by the
following incident of historical celebrity.

=== Section 3: Senior's 'Last Hour' == =

One fine morning, in the year 1836, Nassau W. Senior, who may be called
the bel-esprit of English economists, well known, alike for his
economic 'science,' and for his beautiful style, was summoned from
Oxford to Manchester, to learn in the latter place, the Political
Economy that he taught in the former. The manufacturers elected him as
their champion, not only against the newly passed Factory Act, but
against the still more menacing Ten-hours' agitation. With their usual
practical acuteness, they had found out- that the learned Professor
'wanted a good deal of finishing;' it was this discovery that caused
them to write for him. On his side the Professor has embodied the
lecture he received from the Manchester manufacturers, in a pamphlet,
entitled: 'Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the cotton
manufacture.' London, 1837. Here we find, amongst others, the following
edifying passage:

'Under the present law, no mill in which persons under 18 years of age
are employed, ... can be worked more than 11 1/2 hours a day, that is,
12 hours for 5 days in the week, and nine on Saturday.

'Now the following analysis (!) will show that in a mill so worked, the
whole net profit is derived "from the last hour". I will suppose a
manufacturer to invest Pounds 100,000: -- Pounds 80,000 in his mill and
machinery, and Pounds 20,000 in raw material and wages. The annual
return of that mill, supposing the capital to be turned once a year,
and gross profits to be 15 per cent., ought to be goods worth Pounds
15,000.... Of this Pounds 115,000, each of the twenty-three half-hours
of work produces 5-115ths or one twenty-third. Of these 23-23rds
(constituting the whole Pounds 115,000) twenty, that is to say Pounds
100,000 out of the Pounds 115,000, simply replace the capital; -- one
twenty-third (or Pounds 5,000 out of the Pounds 115,000) makes up for
the deterioration of the mill and machinery. The remaining 2-23rds,
that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day,
produce the net profit of 10 per cent. If, therefore (prices remaining
the same), the factory could be kept at work thirteen hours instead of
eleven and a half, with an addition of about Pounds 2,600 to the
circulating capital, the net profit would be more than doubled. On the
other hand, if the hours of working were reduced by one hour per day
(prices remaining the same), the "net "profit would be destroyed -- if
they were reduced by one hour and a half, even the "gross "profit would
be destroyed.'0

And the Professor calls this an 'analysis!' If, giving credence to the
out-cries of the manufacturers, he believed that the workmen spend the
best part of the day in the production, i.e., the reproduction or
replacement of the value of the buildings, machinery, cotton, coal,
&c., then his analysis was superfluous. His answer would simply have
been: -- Gentlemen! if you work your mills for 10 hours instead of
11 1/2, then, other things being equal, the daily consumption of cotton,
machinery, &c., will decrease in proportion. You gain just as much as
you lose. Your work-people will in future spend one hour and a half
less time in reproducing or replacing the capital that has been
advanced. -- If, on the other hand, he did not believe them without
further inquiry, but, as being an expert in such matters, deemed an
analysis necessary, then he ought, in a question that is concerned
exclusively with the relations of net profit to the length of the
working day, before all things to have asked the manufacturers, to be
careful not to lump together machinery, workshops, raw material, and
labour, but to be good enough to place the constant capital, invested
in buildings, machinery, raw material, &c., on one side of the account,
and the capital advanced in wages on the other side. If the Professor
then found, that in accordance with the calculation of the
manufacturers, the workman reproduced or replaced his wages in 2
half-hours, in that case, he should have continued his analysis thus:

According to your figures, the workman in the last hour but one
produces his wages, and in the last hour your surplus value or net
profit. Now, since in equal periods he produces equal values, the
produce of the last hour but one, must have the same value as that of
the last hour. Further, it is only while he labours that he produces
any value at all, and the amount of his labour is measured by his
labour-time. This you say, amounts to 11 1/2 hours a day. He employs one
portion of these 11 1/2 hours, in producing or replacing his wages, and
the remaining portion in producing your net profit. Beyond this he does
absolutely nothing. But since, on your assumption, his wages, and the
surplus value he yields, are of equal value, it is clear that he
produces his wages in 5 1/4 hours, and your net profit in the other 5 1/4
hours. Again, since the value of the yarn produced in 2 hours, is equal
to the sum of the values of his wages and of your net profit, the
measure of the value of this yarn must be 11 1/2 working-hours, of which
5 1/4 hours measure the value of the yarn produced in the last hour but
one, and 5 1/4, the value of the yarn produced in the last hour. We now
come to a ticklish point; therefore, attention! The last working-hour
but one is, like the first, an ordinary working-hour, neither more nor
less. How then can the spinner produce in one hour, in the shape of
yarn, a value that embodies 5 1/4 hours' labour? The truth is that he
performs no such miracle. The use-value produced by him in one hour, is
a definite quantity of yarn. The value of this yarn is measured by 5 1/4
working-hours, of which 4 1/4 were, without any assistance from him,
previously embodied in the means of production, in the cotton, the
machinery, and so on; the remaining one hour alone is added by him.
Therefore since his wages are produced in 5 1/4 hours, and the yarn
produced in one hour also contains 5 1/4 hours' work, there is no
witchcraft in the result, that the value created by his 5 1/4 hours'
spinning, is equal to the value of the product spun in one hour. You
are altogether on the wrong track, if you think that he loses a single
moment of his working day, in reproducing or replacing the values of
the cotton, the machinery, and so on. On the contrary, it is because
his labour converts the cotton and spindles into yarn, because he
spins, that the values of the cotton and spindles go over to the yarn
of their own accord. This result is owing to the quality of his labour,
not to its quantity. It is true, he will in one hour transfer to the
yarn more value, in the shape of cotton, than he will in half an hour;
but that is only because in one hour he spins up more cotton than in
half an hour. You see then, your assertion, that the workman produces,
in the last hour but one, the value of his wages, and in the last hour
your net profit, amounts to no more than this, that in the yarn
produced by him in 2 working-hours, whether they are the 2 first or the
2 last hours of the working day, in that yarn, there are incorporated
11 1/2 working-hours, or just a whole day's work, "i.e.", two hours of
his own work and 9 1/2 hours of other people's. And my assertion that,
in the first 5 1/4 hours, he produces his wages, and in the last 5 1/4
hours your net profit, amounts only to this, that you pay him for the
former, but not for the latter. In speaking of payment of labour,
instead of payment of labour-power, I only talk your own slang. Now,
gentlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay for, with that which
you do not pay for, you will find that they are to one another, as half
a day is to half a day; this gives a rate of 100%, and a very pretty
percentage it is. Further, there is not the least doubt, that if you
make you 'hands' toil for 13 hours, instead of 11 1/2, and, as may be
expected from you, treat the work done in that extra one hour and a
half, as pure surplus labour, then the latter will be increased from
5 1/4 hours' labour to 7 3/4 hours' labour, and the rate of surplus value
from 100% to 126 2/23%. So that you are altogether too sanguine, in
expecting that by such an addition of 1 1/2 hours to the working day,
the rate will rise from 100% to 200% and more, in other words that
it will be 'more than doubled.' On the other hand-man's heart is a
wonderful thing, especially when carried in the purse -- you take too
pessimist a view, when you fear, that with a reduction of the hours of
labour from 11 1/2 to 10, the whole of your net profit will go to the
dogs. Not at all. All other conditions remaining the same, the surplus
labour will fall from 5 1/4 hours to 4 1/4 hours, a period that still gives
a very profitable rate of surplus value, namely 82 14/23%. But this
dreadful 'last hour,' about which you have invented more stories than
have the millenarians about the day of judgment, is 'all bosh.' If it
goes, it will cost neither you, your net profit, nor the boys and girls
whom you employ, their 'purity of mind.'1 Whenever your 'last hour'
strikes in earnest, think of the Oxford Professor. And now, gentlemen,
'farewell, and may we meet again in yonder better world, but not
before.' Senior invented the battle cry of the 'last hour' in 1836.2 In
the "London Economist "of the 15th April, 1848, the same cry was again
raised by James Wilson, an economic mandarin of high standing: this
time in opposition to the 10 hours' bill.

=== Section 4: Surplus-Produce == =

The portion of the product that represents the surplus value, (one
tenth of the 20 lbs., or 2 lbs. of yarn, in the example given in Sec.
2) we call 'surplus-produce.' Just as the rate of surplus value is
determined by its relation, not to the sum total of the capital, but to
its variable part; in like manner, the relative quantity of
surplus-produce is determined by the ratio that this produce bears, not
to the remaining part of the total product, but to that part of it in
which is incorporated the necessary labour. Since the production of
surplus value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production, it is
clear, that the greatness of a man's or a nation's wealth should be
measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative
magnitude of the surplus-produce.3

The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus labour, i.e., of the
periods of time during which the workman replaces the value of his
labour-power, and produces the surplus value, this sum constitutes the
actual time during which he works, "i.e.", the working day.

== Chapter 10: The Working day = =

=== Section 1: The Limits of the Working day == =

We started with the supposition that labour-power is bought and sold at
its value. Its value, like that of all other commodities, is determined
by the working-time necessary to its production. If the production of
the average daily means of subsistence of the labourer takes up 6
hours, he must work, on the average, 6 hours every day, to produce his
daily labour-power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of
its sale. The necessary part of his working day amounts to 6 hours, and
is, therefore, "caeteris paribus" , a given quantity. But with this,
the extent of the working day itself is not yet given.


Let us assume that the line A------B represents the length of the
necessary working-time, say 6 hours. If the labour be prolonged 1, 3,
or 6 hours beyond A----B, we have 3 other lines:




representing 3 different working days of 7, 9, and 12 hours. The
extension B----C of the line A----B represents the length of the
surplus labour. As the working day is A----B + B----C or A----C, it
varies with the variable quantity B----C. Since A----B is constant, the
ratio of B----C to A----B can always be calculated. In working day I,
it is 1/6, in working day II, 3/6, in working day III 6/6 of A----B.
Since further the ratio (surplus working-time)/(necessary
working-time), determines the rate of the surplus value, the latter is
given by the ratio of B---C to A---B. It amounts in the 3 different
working days respectively to 16 2/3, 50 and 100 per cent. On the other
hand, the rate of surplus value alone would not give us the extent of
the working day. If this rate, "e.g"., were 100 per cent., the working
day might be of 8, 10, 12, or more hours. It would indicate that the 2
constituent parts of the working day, necessary-labour and surplus
labour time, were equal in extent, but not how long each of these two
constituent parts was.

The working day is thus not a constant, but a variable quantity. One of
its parts, certainly, is determined by the working-time required for
the reproduction of the labour-power of the labourer himself. But its
total amount varies with the duration of the surplus labour. The
working day is, therefore, determinable, but is, "per se",
indeterminate.

Although the working day is not a fixed, but a fluent quantity, it can,
on the other hand, only vary within certain limits. The minimum limit
is, however, not determinable; of course, if we make the extension line
B-->C or the surplus labour = 0, we have a minimum limit, "i.e"., the
part of the day which the labourer must necessarily work for his own
maintenance. On the basis of capitalist production, however, this
necessary labour can form a part only of the working day; the working
day itself can never be reduced to this minimum. On the other hand, the
working day has a maximum limit. It cannot be prolonged beyond a
certain point. This maximum limit is conditioned by two things. First,
by the physical bounds of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of the
natural day a man can expend only a definite quantity of his vital
force. A horse, in like manner, can only work from day to day, 8 hours.
During part of the day this force must rest, sleep; during another part
the man has to satisfy other physical needs, to feed, wash, and clothe
himself. Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of
the working day encounters moral ones. The labourer needs time for
satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of
which are conditioned by the general state of social advancement. The
variation of the working day fluctuates, therefore, within physical and
social bounds. But both these limiting conditions are of a very elastic
nature, and allow the greatest latitude. So we find working days of 8,
10, 12, 14, 16, 18 hours, i.e., of the most different lengths.

The capitalist has bought the labour-power at its day-rate. To him its
use-value belongs during one working day. He has thus acquired the
right to make the labourer work for him during one day. But, what is a
working day?

At all events, less than a natural day. By how much? The capitalist has
his own views of this "ultima Thule" , the necessary limit of the
working day. As capitalist, he is only capital personified. His soul is
the soul of capital. But capital has one single life impulse, the
tendency to create value and surplus value, to make its constant
factor, the means of production, absorb the greatest possible amount of
surplus labour.

Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking
living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it sucks. The time
during which the labourer works, is the time during which the
capitalist consumes the labour-power he has purchased of him.

If the labourer consumes his disposable time for himself, he robs the
capitalist.

The capitalist then takes his stand on the law of the exchange of
commodities. He, like all other buyers, seeks to get the greatest
possible benefit out of the use-value of his commodity. Suddenly the
voice of the labourer, which had been stifled in the storm and stress
of the process of production, rises:

The commodity that I have sold to you differs from the crowd of other
commodities, in that its use creates value, and a value greater than
its own. That is why you bought it. That which on your side appears a
spontaneous expansion of capital, is on mine extra expenditure of
labour-power. You and I know on the market only one law, that of the
exchange of commodities. And the consumption of the commodity belongs
not to the seller who parts with it, but to the buyer, who acquires it.
To you, therefore, belongs the use of my daily labour-power. But by
means of the price that you pay for it each day, I must be able to
reproduce it daily, and to sell it again. Apart from natural exhaustion
through age, &c., I must be able on the morrow to work with the same
normal amount of force, health and freshness as to-day. You preach to
me constantly the gospel of 'saving' and 'abstinence.' Good! I will,
like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and
abstain from all foolish waste of it. I will each day spend, set in
motion, put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its
normal duration, and healthy development. By an unlimited extension of
the working day, you may in one day use up a quantity of labour-power
greater than I can restore in three. What you gain in labour I lose in
substance. The use of my labour-power and the spoliation of it are
quite different things. If the average time that (doing a reasonable
amount of work) an average labourer can live, is 30 years, the value of
my labour-power, which you pay me from day to day is 1/(365√ó30) or
1/10950 of its total value. But if you consume it in 10 years, you pay
me daily 1/10950 instead of 1/3650 of its total value, "i.e"., only 1/3
of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, every day of 2/3 of the
value of my commodity. You pay me for one day's labour-power, whilst
you use that of 3 days. That is against our contract and the law of
exchanges. I demand, therefore, a working day of normal length, and I
demand it without any appeal to your heart, for in money matters
sentiment is out of place. You may be a model citizen, perhaps a member
of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the
odour of sanctity to boot; but the thing that you represent face to
face with me has no heart in its breast. That which seems to throb
there is my own heart-beating. I demand the normal working day because
I, like every other seller, demand the value of my commodity.

We see then, that, apart from extremely elastic bounds, the nature of
the exchange of commodities itself imposes no limit to the working day,
no limit to surplus labour. The capitalist maintains his rights as a
purchaser when he tries to make the working day as long as possible,
and to make, whenever possible, two working days out of one. On the
other hand, the peculiar nature of the commodity sold implies a limit
to its consumption by the purchaser, and the labourer maintains his
right as seller when he wishes to reduce the working day to one of
definite normal duration. There is here, therefore, an antinomy, right
against right, both equally bearing the seal of the law of exchanges.
Between equal rights force decides. Hence is it that in the history of
capitalist production, the determination of what is a working day,
presents itself as the result of a struggle, a struggle between
collective capital, "i.e., "the class of capitalists, and collective
labour, "i.e., "the working-class.

=== Section 2: The Greed for Surplus-Labor, Manufacturer and Boyard ==
=

Capital has not invented surplus labour. Wherever a part of society
possesses the monopoly of the means of production, the labourer, free
or not free, must add to the working-time necessary for his own
maintenance an extra working-time in order to produce the means of
subsistence for the owners of the means of production , whether this
proprietor be the Athenian œáŒ±ŒªŒøœÇ Œ≥Œ±œáŒ±Œ∏ŒøœÇ , Etruscan
theocrat, "civis Romanus" , Norman baron, American slave-owner,
Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or capitalist. It is, however, clear
that in any given economic formation of society, where not the
exchange-value but the use-value of the product predominates, surplus
labour will be limited by a given set of wants which may be greater or
less, and that here no boundless thirst for surplus labour arises from
the nature of the production itself. Hence in antiquity over-work
becomes horrible only when the object is to obtain exchange-value in
its specific independent money-form; in the production of gold and
silver. Compulsory working to death is here the recognised form of
over-work. Only read Diodorus Siculus. Still these are exceptions in
antiquity. But as soon as people, whose production still moves within
the lower forms of slave-labour, corv√©e-labour, &c., are drawn into
the whirlpool of an international market dominated by the capitalistic
mode of production, the sale of their products for export becoming
their principal interest, the civilised horrors of over-work are
grafted on the barbaric horrors of slavery, serfdom, &c. Hence the
negro labour in the Southern States of the American Union preserved
something of a patriarchal character, so long as production was chiefly
directed to immediate local consumption. But in proportion, as the
export of cotton became of vital interest to these states, the
over-working of the negro and sometimes the using up of his life in 7
years of labour became a factor in a calculated and calculating system.
It was no longer a question of obtaining from him a certain quantity of
useful products. It was now a question of production of surplus labour
itself: So was it also with the corv√©e, e.g., in the Danubian
Principalities (now Roumania).

The comparison of the greed for surplus labour in the Danubian
Principalities with the same greed in English factories has a special
interest, because surplus labour in the corv√©e has an independent and
palpable form.

Suppose the working day consists of 6 hours of necessary labour, and 6
hours of surplus labour. Then the free labourer gives the capitalist
every week 6 x 6 or 36 hours of surplus labour. It is the same as if he
worked 3 days in the week for himself, and 3 days in the week gratis
for the capitalist. But this is not evident on the surface. Surplus
labour and necessary labour glide one into the other. I can, therefore,
express the same relationship by saying, e.g., that the labourer in
every minute works 30 seconds for himself, and 30 for the capitalist,
etc. It is otherwise with the corv√©e. The necessary labour which the
Wallachian peasant does for his own maintenance is distinctly marked
off from his surplus labour on behalf of the Boyard. The one he does on
his own field, the other on the seignorial estate. Both parts of the
labour-time exist, therefore, independently, side by side one with the
other. In the corv√©e the surplus labour is accurately marked off from
the necessary labour. This, however, can make no difference with regard
to the quantitative relation of surplus labour to necessary labour.
Three days' surplus labour in the week remain three days that yield no
equivalent to the labourer himself, whether it be called corv√©e or
wage-labour. But in the capitalist the greed for surplus labour appears
in the straining after an unlimited extension of the working day, in
the Boyard more simply in a direct hunting after days of corv√©e.0

In the Danubian Principalities the corv√©e was mixed up with rents in
kind and other appurtenances of bondage, but it formed the most
important tribute paid to the ruling class. Where this was the case,
the corv√©e rarely arose from serfdom; serfdom much more frequently on
the other hand took origin from the corv√©e.1 This is what took place
in the Roumanian provinces. Their original mode of production was based
on community of the soil, but not in the Slavonic or Indian form. Part
of the land was cultivated in severalty as freehold by the members of
the community, another part -- "ager publicus --" was cultivated by
them in common. The products of this common labour served partly as a
reserve fund against bad harvests and other accidents, partly as a
public store for providing the costs of war, religion, and other common
expenses. In course of time military and clerical dignitaries usurped,
along with the common land, the labour spent upon it. The labour of the
free peasants on their common land was transformed into corv√©e for the
thieves of the common land. This corv√©e soon developed into a servile
relationship existing in point of fact, not in point of law, until
Russia, the liberator of the world, made it legal under presence of
abolishing serfdom. The code of the corv√©e, which the Russian General
Kisseleff proclaimed in 1831, was of course dictated by the Boyards
themselves. Thus Russia conquered with one blow the magnates of the
Danubian provinces, and the applause of liberal cretins throughout
Europe.

According to the 'R√®glement organique,' as this code of the corv√©e is
called, every Wallachian peasant owes to the so-called landlord,
besides a mass of detailed payments in kind: "(1)", 12 days of general
labour; "(2)", one day of field labour; "(3)", one day of wood
carrying. In all, 14 days in the year. With deep insight into Political
Economy, however, the working day is not taken in its ordinary sense,
but as the working day necessary to the production of an average daily
product; and that average daily product is determined in so crafty a
way that no Cyclops would be done with it in 24 hours. In dry words,
the R√©glement itself declares with true Russian irony that by 12
working days one must understand the product of the manual labour of 36
days, by 1 day of field labour 3 days, and by 1 day of wood carrying in
like manner three times as much. In all, 42 corv√©e days. To this had
to be added the so-called jobagie, service due to the lord for
extraordinary occasions. In proportion to the size of its population,
every village has to furnish annually a definite contingent to the
jobagie. This additional corv√©e is estimated at 14 days for each
Wallachian peasant. Thus the prescribed corv√©e amounts to 56 working
days yearly. But the agricultural year in Wallachia numbers in
consequence of the severe climate only 210 days, of which 40 for
Sundays and holidays, 30 on an average for bad weather, together 70
days, do not count. 140 working days remain. The ratio of the corv√©e
to the necessary labour 56/84 or 66 2/3 % gives a much smaller rate
of surplus value than that which regulates the labour of the English
agricultural or factory labourer. This is, however, only the legally
prescribed corv√©e. And in a spirit yet more 'liberal' than the English
Factory Acts, the 'R√®glement organique' has known how to facilitate
its own evasion. After it has made 56 days out of 12, the nominal day's
work of each of the 56 corv√©e days is again so arranged that a portion
of it must fall on the ensuing day. In one day, e.g., must be weeded an
extent of land, which, for this work, especially in maize plantations,
needs twice as much time. The legal day's work for some kinds of
agricultural labour is interpretable in such a way that the day begins
in May and ends in October. In Moldavia conditions are still harder.

'The 12 corv√©e days of the 'R√®glement organique' cried a Boyard drunk
with victory, amount to 365 days in the year.'2

If the R√®glement organique of the Danubian provinces was a positive
expression of the greed for surplus labour which every paragraph
legalised, the English Factory Acts are the negative expression of the
same greed. These acts curb the passion of capital for a limitless
draining of labour-power, by forcibly limiting the working day by state
regulations, made by a state that is ruled by capitalist-and landlord.
Apart from the working-class movement that daily grew more threatening,
the limiting of factory labour was dictated by the same necessity which
spread guano over the English fields. The same blind eagerness for
plunder that in the one case exhausted the soil, had, in the other,
torn up by the roots the living force of the nation. Periodical
epidemics speak on this point as clearly as the diminishing military
standard in Germany and France.3

The Factory Act of 1850 now in force (1867) allows for the average
working day 10 hours, i.e., for the first 5 days 12 hours from 6 a.m.
to 6 p.m., including  1/2 an hour for breakfast, and an hour for dinner,
and thus leaving 10 1/2 working-hours, and 8 hours for Saturday, from 6
a.m. to 2 p.m., of which  1/2 an hour is subtracted for breakfast. 60
working-hours are left, 10 1/2 for each of the first 5 days, 7 1/2 for
the last.4

Certain guardians of these laws are appointed, Factory Inspectors,
directly under the Home Secretary, whose reports are published
half-yearly, by order of Parliament. They give regular and official
statistics of the capitalistic greed for surplus labour.

Let us listen, for a moment, to the Factory Inspectors.5

'The fraudulent mill-owner begins work a quarter of an hour (sometimes
more, sometimes less) before 6 a.m., and leaves off a quarter of an
hour (sometimes more, sometimes less) after 6 p.m. He takes 5 minutes
from the beginning and from the end of the half hour nominally allowed
for breakfast, and 10 minutes at the beginning and end of the hour
nominally allowed for dinner. He works for a quarter of an hour
(sometimes more, sometimes less) after 2 p.m. on Saturday. Thus his
gain is --




Or 5 hours and 40 minutes weekly, which multiplied by 50 working weeks
in the year (allowing two for holidays and occasional stoppages) is
equal to 27 working days.'6


'Five minutes a day's increased work, multiplied by weeks, are equal to
two and a half days of produce in the year.'7

'An additional hour a day gained by small instalments before 6 a.m.,
after 6 p.m., and at the beginning and end of the times nominally fixed
for meals, is nearly equivalent to working 13 months in the year.'8

Crises during which production is interrupted and the factories work
'short time,' i.e., for only a part of the week, naturally do not
affect the tendency to extend the working day. The less business there
is, the more profit has to be made on the business done. The less time
spent in work, the more of that time has to be turned into surplus
labour-time.

Thus the Factory Inspector's report on the period of the crisis from
1857 to 1858:

'It may seem inconsistent that there should be any overworking at a
time when trade is so bad; but that very badness leads to the
transgression by unscrupulous men, they get the extra profit of it. ...
In the last half year, says Leonard Horner, 122 mills in my district
have been given up; 143 were found standing,' yet, over-work is
continued beyond the legal hours.'9

'For a great part of the time,' says Mr. Howell, 'owing to the
depression of trade, many factories were altogether closed, and a still
greater number were working short time. I continue, however, to receive
about the usual number of complaints that half, or three-quarters of an
hour in the day, are snatched from the workers by encroaching upon the
times professedly allowed for rest and refreshment.' 0


The same phenomenon was reproduced on a smaller scale during the
frightful cotton-crises from 1861 to 1865.1


'It is sometimes advanced by way of excuse, when persons are found at
work in a factory, either at a meal hour, or at some illegal time, that
they will not leave the mill at the appointed hour, and that compulsion
is necessary to force them to cease work , especially on Saturday
afternoons. But, if the hands remain in a factory after the machinery
has ceased to revolve ... they would not have been so employed if
sufficient time had been set apart specially for cleaning, &c., either
before 6 a.m. "


" or before 2 p.m. on Saturday afternoons.' 2


'The profit to be gained by it (over-working in violation of the Act)
appears to be, to many, a greater temptation than they can resist; they
calculate upon the chance of not being found out; and when they see the
small amount of penalty and costs, which those who have been convicted
have had to pay, they find that if they should be detected there will
still be a considerable balance of gain.... 3 In cases where the
additional time is gained by a multiplication of small thefts in the
course of the day, there are insuperable difficulties to the inspectors
making out a case.' 4


These 'small thefts' of capital from the labourer's meal and recreation
time, the factory inspectors also designate as 'petty pilferings of
minutes,' 5 'snatching a few minutes,'6 or, as the labourers
technically called them, 'nibbling and cribbling at meal-times.' 7


It is evident that in this atmosphere the formation of surplus value by
surplus labour, is no secret.

'If you allow me,' said a highly respectable master to me, 'to work
only ten minutes in the day over-time, you put one thousand a year in
my pocket.'8 'Moments are the elements of profit.'9

Nothing is from this point of view more characteristic than the
designation of the workers who work full time as 'full-timers,' and the
children under 13 who are only allowed to work 6 hours as
'half-timers.' The worker is here nothing more than personified
labour-time. All individual distinctions are merged in those of
'full-timers' and 'half-timers' 0


=== Section 3: Branches of English Industry Without Legal Limits to
Exploitation == =

We have hitherto considered the tendency to the extension of the
working day, the were-wolf's hunger for surplus labour in a department
where the monstrous exactions, not surpassed, says an English bourgeois
economist, by the cruelties of the Spaniards to the American red-skins1
, caused capital at last to be bound by the chains of legal
regulations. Now, let us cast a glance at certain branches of
production in which the exploitation of labour is either free from
fetters to this day, or was so yesterday.

Mr. Broughton Charlton, county magistrate, declared, as chairman of a
meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, Nottingham, on the 14th January,
1860, 'that there was an amount of privation and suffering among that
portion of the population connected with the lace trade, unknown in
other parts of the kingdom, indeed, in the civilised world ....
Children of nine or ten years are dragged from their squalid beds at
two, three, or four o'clock in the morning and compelled to work for a
bare subsistence until ten, eleven, or twelve at night, their limbs
wearing away, their frames dwindling, their faces whitening, and their
humanity absolutely sinking into a stone-like torpor, utterly horrible
to contemplate.... We are not surprised that Mr. Mallett, or any other
manufacturer, should stand forward and protest against discussion....
The system, as the Rev. Montagu Valpy describes it, is one of
unmitigated slavery, socially, physically, morally, and spiritually....
What can be thought of a town which holds a public meeting to petition
that the period of labour for men shall be diminished to eighteen hours
a day? .... We declaim against the Virginian and Carolinian
cotton-planters. Is their black-market, their lash, and their barter of
human flesh more detestable than this slow sacrifice of humanity which
takes place in order that veils and collars may be fabricated for the
benefit of capitalists?'2

The potteries of Staffordshire have, during the last 22 years, been the
subject of three parliamentary inquiries. The result is embodied in Mr.
Scriven's Report of 1841 to the 'Children's Employment Commissioners,'
in the report of Dr. Greenhow of 1860 published by order of the medical
officer of the Privy Council (Public Health, 3rd Report, 112-113),
lastly, in the report of Mr. Longe of 1862 in the 'First Report of the
Children's Employment Commission, of the 13th June, 1863.' For my
purpose it is enough to take, from the reports of 1860 and 1863, some
depositions of the exploited children themselves. From the children we
may form an opinion as to the adults, especially the girls and women,
and that in a branch of industry by the side of which cotton-spinning
appears an agreeable and healthful occupation. 3


William Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when he began to
work. He 'ran moulds' (carried ready-moulded articles into the
drying-room, afterwards bringing back the empty mould) from the
beginning. He came to work every day in the week at 6 a.m., and left
off about 9 p.m. 'I work till 9 o'clock at night six days in the week.
I have done so seven or eight weeks.'

Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old! J. Murray, 12 years of
age, says: 'I turn jigger, and run moulds. I come at 6. Sometimes I
come at 4. I worked all night last night, till 6 o'clock this morning.
I have not been in bed since the night before last. There were eight or
nine other boys working last night. All but one have come this morning.
I get 3 shillings and sixpence. I do not get any more for working at
night. I worked two nights last week.'

Fernyhough, a boy of ten:

'I have not always an hour (for dinner). I have only half an hour
sometimes; on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday.' 4


Dr. Greenhow states that the average duration of life in the pottery
districts of Stoke-on-Trent, and Wolstanton is extraordinarily short.
Although in the district of Stoke, only 36.6% and in Wolstanton only
30.4% of the adult male population above 20 are employed in the
potteries, among the men of that age in the first district more than
half, in the second, nearly 2/5 of the whole deaths are the result of
pulmonary diseases among the potters. Dr. Boothroyd, a medical
practitioner at Hanley, says:

'Each successive generation of potters is more dwarfed and less robust
than the preceding one.'

In like manner another doctor, Mr. M'Bean:

'Since he began to practice among the potters 25 years ago, he had
observed a marked degeneration especially shown in diminution of
stature and breadth.'

These statements are taken from the report of Dr. Greenhow in 1860.5

From the report of the Commissioners in 1863, the following: Dr. J. T.
Arledge, senior physician of the North Staffordshire Infirmary, says:

'The potters as a class, both men and women, represent a degenerated
population, both physically and morally. They are, as a rule, stunted
in growth, ill-shaped, and frequently ill-formed in the chest; they
become prematurely old, and are certainly short-lived; they are
phlegmatic and bloodless, and exhibit their debility of constitution by
obstinate attacks of dyspepsia, and disorders of the liver and kidneys,
and by rheumatism. But of all diseases they are especially prone to
chest-disease, to pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, and asthma. One form
would appear peculiar to them, and is known as potter's asthma, or
potter's consumption. Scrofula attacking the glands, or bones, or other
parts of the body, is a disease of two-thirds or more of the potters
.... That the 'degenerescence' of the population of this district is
not even greater than it is, is due to the constant recruiting from the
adjacent country, and intermarriages with more healthy races.'6

Mr. Charles Parsons, late house surgeon of the same institution, writes
in a letter to Commissioner Longe, amongst other things:

'I can only speak from personal observation and not from statistical
data, but I do not hesitate to assert that my indignation has been
aroused again and again at the sight of poor children whose health has
been sacrificed to gratify the avarice of either parents or employers.'
He enumerates the causes of the diseases of the potters, and sums them
up in the phrase, 'long hours.' The report of the Commission trusts
that 'a manufacture which has assumed so prominent a place in the whole
world, will not long be subject to the remark that its great success is
accompanied with the physical deterioration, widespread bodily
suffering, and early death of the workpeople ... by whose labour and
skill such great results have been achieved.' 7


And all that holds of the potteries in England is true of those in
Scotland.8

The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery
of the method of applying phosphorus to the match itself. Since 1845
this manufacture has rapidly developed in England, and has extended
especially amongst the thickly populated parts of London as well as in
Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Norwich, Newcastle and
Glasgow. With it has spread the form of lockjaw, which a Vienna
physician in 1845 discovered to be a disease peculiar to
lucifer-matchmakers. Half the workers are children under thirteen, and
young persons under eighteen. The manufacture is on account of its
unhealthiness and unpleasantness in such bad odour that only the most
miserable part of the labouring class, half-starved widows and so
forth, deliver up their children to it, 'the ragged, half-starved,
untaught children.'9

Of the witnesses that Commissioner White examined (1863), 270 were
under 18, 50 under 10, 10 only 8, and 5 only 6 years old. A range of
the working day from 12 to 14 or 15 hours, night-labour, irregular
meal-times, meals for the most part taken in the very workrooms that
are pestilent with phosphorus. Dante would have found the worst horrors
of his Inferno surpassed in this manufacture.

In the manufacture of paper-hangings the coarser sorts are printed by
machine; the finer by hand (block-printing). The most active business
months are from the beginning of October to the end of April. During
this time the work goes on fast and furious without intermission from 6
a.m. to 10 p.m. or further into the night.

J. Leach deposes:

'Last winter six out of nineteen girls were away from ill-health at one
time from over-work. I have to bawl at them to keep them awake.' W.
Duffy: 'I have seen when the children could none of them keep their
eyes open for the work; indeed, none of us could.' J. Lightbourne: 'Am
13 We worked last winter till 9 (evening), and the winter before till
10. I used to cry with sore feet every night last winter.' G. Apsden:
'That boy of mine when he was 7 years old I used to carry him on my
back to and fro through the snow, and he used to have 16 hours a day
... I have often knelt down to feed him as he stood by the machine, for
he could not leave it or stop.' Smith, the managing partner of a
Manchester factory: 'We (he means his 'hands' who work for 'us') work
on with no stoppage for meals, so that day's work of 10 1/2 hours is
finished by 4.30 p.m., and all after that is over-time.'0 (Does this
Mr. Smith take no meals himself during 10 1/2 hours?) 'We (this same
Smith) seldom leave off working before 6 p.m. (he means leave off the
consumption of 'our' labour-power machines), so that we (iterum
Crispinus) are really working over-time the whole year round. For all
these, children and adults alike (152 children and young persons and
140 adults), the average work for the last 18 months has been at the
very least 7 days, 5 hours, or 78  1/2 hours a week. For the six weeks
ending May 2nd this year (1862), the average was higher -- 8 days or 84
hours a week.'

Still this same Mr. Smith, who is so extremely devoted to the "pluralis
majestatis" , adds with a smile, "Machine-work is not great.' So the
employers in the block-printing say: 'Hand labour is more healthy than
machine work.' On the whole, manufacturers declare with indignation
against the proposal 'to stop the machines at least during meal-times.'

'A clause,' says Mr. Otley, manager of a wall-paper factory in the
Borough, 'which allowed work between, say 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. in would
suit us (!) very well, but the factory hours, 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., are not
suitable. Our machine is always stopped for dinner. (What generosity!)
There is no waste of paper and colour to speak of. But,' he adds
sympathetically, 'I can understand the loss of time not being liked.'

The report of the Commission opines with na√Øvet√© that the fear of
some 'leading firms' of losing time, "i.e., "the time for appropriating
the labour of others, and thence losing profit is not a sufficient
reason for allowing children under 13, and young persons under 18,
working 12 to 16 hours per day, to lose their dinner, nor for giving it
to them as coal and water are supplied to the steam-engine, soap to
wool, oil to the wheel -- as merely auxiliary material to the
instruments of labour, during the process of production itself.1

No branch of industry in England (we do not take into account the
making of bread by machinery recently introduced) has preserved up to
the present day a method of production so archaic, so -- as we see from
the poets of the Roman Empire -- pre-christian, as baking. But capital,
as was said earlier, is at first indifferent as to the technical
character of the labour-process; it begins by taking it just as it
finds it.

The incredible adulteration of bread, especially in London, was first
revealed by the House of Commons Committee 'on the adulteration of
articles of food' (1855-56), and Dr. Hassall's work, 'Adulterations
detected.' 2 The consequence of these revelations was the Act of August
6th, 1860, 'for preventing the adulteration of articles of food and
drink,' an inoperative law, as it naturally shows the tenderest
consideration for every Free-trader who determines by the buying or
selling of adulterated commodities 'to turn an honest penny.' 3 The
Committee itself formulated more or less na√Øvely its conviction that
Free-trade meant essentially trade with adulterated, or as the English
ingeniously put it, 'sophisticated' goods. In fact this kind of
sophistry knows better than Protagoras how to make white black, and
black white, and better than the Eleatics how to demonstrate "ad
oculos" that everything is only appearance. 4


At all events the Committee had directed the attention of the public to
its 'daily bread,' and therefore to the baking trade. At the same time
in public meetings and in petitions to Parliament rose the cry of the
London journeymen bakers against their over-work, &c. The cry was so
urgent that Mr. H. S. Tremenheere, also a member of the Commission of
1863 several times mentioned, was appointed Royal Commissioner of
Inquiry. His report. 5 together with the evidence given, roused not the
heart of the public but its stomach. Englishmen, always well up in the
Bible, knew well enough that man, unless by elective grace a
capitalist, or landlord, or sinecurist, is commanded to eat his bread
in the sweat of his brow, but they did not know that he had to eat
daily in his bread a certain quantity of human perspiration mixed with
the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead black-beetles, and putrid
German yeast, without counting alum, sand, and other agreeable mineral
ingredients. Without any regard to his holiness, Free-trade, the free
baking-trade was therefore placed under the supervision of the State
inspectors (Close of the Parliamentary session of 1863), and by the
same Act of Parliament, work from 9 in the evening to 5 in the morning
was forbidden for journeymen bakers under 18. The last clause speaks
volumes as to the over-work in this old-fashioned, homely line of
business.

'The work of a London journeyman baker begins, as a rule, at about
eleven at night. At that hour he 'makes the dough,' -- a laborious
process, which lasts from half an hour to three quarters of an hour,
according to the size of the batch or the labour bestowed upon it. He
then lies down upon the kneading-board, which is also the covering of
the trough in which the dough is 'made'; and with a sack under him, and
another rolled up as a pillow, he sleeps for about a couple of hours.
He is then engaged in a rapid and continuous labour for about five
hours -- throwing out the dough, 'scaling it off,' moulding it, putting
it into the oven, preparing and baking rolls and fancy bread, taking
the batch bread out of the oven, and up into the shop, &c., &c. The
temperature of a bakehouse ranges from about 75 to upwards of 90
degrees, and in the smaller bakehouses approximates usually to the
higher rather than to the lower degree of heat. When the business of
making the bread, rolls, &c., is over, that of its distribution begins,
and a considerable proportion of the journeymen in the trade, after
working hard in the manner described during the night, are upon their
legs for many hours during the day, carrying baskets, or wheeling
hand-carts, and sometimes again in the bakehouse, leaving off work at
various hours between 1 and 6 p.m. according to the season of the year,
or the amount and nature of their master's business; while others are
again engaged in the bakehouse in 'bringing out' more batches until
late in the afternoon. 6 ... During what is called 'the London season,'
the operatives belonging to the 'full-priced' bakers at the West End of
the town, generally begin work at 11 p.m., and are engaged in making
the bread, with one or two short (sometimes very short) intervals of
rest, up to 8 o'clock the next morning. They are then engaged all day
long, up to 4, 5, 6, and as late as 7 o'clock in the evening carrying
out bread, or sometimes in the afternoon in the bakehouse again,
assisting in the biscuit-baking. They may have, after they have done
their work, sometimes five or six, sometimes only four or five hours'
sleep before they begin again. On Fridays they always begin sooner,
some about ten o'clock, and continue in some cases, at work, either in
making or delivering the bread up to 8 p.m. on Saturday night, but more
generally up to 4 or 5 o'clock, Sunday morning. On Sundays the men must
attend twice or three times during the day for an hour or two to make
preparations for the next day's bread.... The men employed by the
underselling masters (who sell their bread under the 'full price,' and
who, as already pointed out, comprise three-fourths of the London
bakers) have not only to work on the average longer hours, but their
work is almost entirely confined to the bakehouse. The underselling
masters generally sell their bread... in the shop. If they send it out,
which is not common, except as supplying chandlers' shops, they usually
employ other hands for that purpose. It is not their practice to
deliver bread from house to house. Towards the end of the week ... the
men begin on Thursday night at 10 o'clock, and continue on with only
slight intermission until late on Saturday evening.' 7


Even the bourgeois intellect understands the position of the
'underselling' masters. 'The unpaid labour of the men was made the
source whereby the competition was carried on.' 8 And the 'full-priced'
baker denounces his underselling competitors to the Commission of
Inquiry as thieves of foreign labour and adulterators.

'They only exist now by first defrauding the public, and next getting
18 hours' work out of their men for 12 hours' wages.' 9


The adulteration of bread and the formation of a class of bakers that
sells the bread below the full price, date from the beginning of the
18th century, from the time when the corporate character of the trade
was lost, and the capitalist in the form of the miller or flour-factor,
rises behind the nominal master baker.0 Thus was laid the foundation of
capitalistic production in this trade, of the unlimited extension of
the working day and of night-labour, although the latter only since
1824 gained a serious footing, even in London. 1


After what has just been said, it will be understood that the Report of
the Commission classes journeymen bakers among the short-lived
labourers, who, having by good luck escaped the normal decimation of
the children of the working-class, rarely reach the age of 42.
Nevertheless, the baking trade is always overwhelmed with applicants.
The sources of the supply of these labour-powers to London are
Scotland, the western agricultural districts of England, and Germany.

In the years 1858-60, the journeymen bakers in Ireland organised at
their own expense great meetings to agitate against night and Sunday
work. The public -- e.g., at the Dublin meeting in May, 1860 -- took
their part with Irish warmth. As a result of this movement, day-labour
alone was successfully established in Wexford, Kilkenny, Clonmel,
Waterford, &c.

'In Limerick, where the grievances of the journeymen are demonstrated
to be excessive, the movement has been defeated by the opposition of
the master bakers, the miller bakers being the greatest opponents. The
example of Limerick led to a retrogression in Ennis and Tipperary. In
Cork, where the strongest possible demonstration of feeling took place,
the masters, by exercising their power of turning the men out of
employment, have defeated the movement. In Dublin, the master bakers
have offered the most determined opposition to the movement, and by
discountenancing as much as possible the journeymen promoting it, have
succeeded in leading the men into acquiescence in Sunday work and
night-work, contrary to the convictions of the men.' 2


The Committee of the English Government, which Government, in Ireland,
is armed to the teeth, and generally knows how to show it, remonstrates
in mild, though funereal, tones with the implacable master bakers of
Dublin, Limerick, Cork, &c.:

'The Committee believe that the hours of labour are limited by natural
laws, which cannot be violated with impunity. That for master bakers to
induce their workmen, by the fear of losing employment, to violate
their religious convictions and their better feelings, to disobey the
laws of the land, and to disregard public opinion (this all refers to
Sunday labour), is calculated to provoke ill-feeling between workmen
and masters, ... and affords an example dangerous to religion,
morality, and social order.... The Committee believe that any constant
work beyond 12 hours a-day encroaches on the domestic and private life
of the working-man, and so leads to disastrous moral results,
interfering with each man's home, and the discharge of his family
duties as a son, a brother, a husband, a father. That work beyond 12
hours has a tendency to undermine the health of the workingman, and so
leads to premature old age and death, to the great injury of families
of working-men, thus deprived of the care and support of the head of
the family when most required.' 3


So far, we have dealt with Ireland. On the other side of the channel,
in Scotland, the agricultural labourer, the ploughman, protests against
his 13-14 hours' work in the most inclement climate, with 4 hours'
additional work on Sunday (in this land of Sabbatarians!), 4 whilst, at
the same time, three railway men are standing before a London coroner's
jury -- a guard, an engine-driver, a signalman. A tremendous railway
accident has hurried hundreds of passengers into another world. The
negligence of the employee is the cause of the misfortune. They declare
with one voice before the jury that ten or twelve years before, their
labour only lasted eight hours a-day. During the last five or six years
it had been screwed up to 14, 18, and 20 hours, and under a specially
severe pressure of holiday-makers, at times of excursion trains, it
often lasted for 40 or 50 hours without a break. They were ordinary
men, not Cyclops. At a certain point their labour-power failed. Torpor
seized them. Their brain ceased to think, their eyes to see. The
thoroughly 'respectable' British jurymen answered by a verdict that
sent them to the next assizes on a charge of manslaughter, and, in a
gentle 'rider' to their verdict, expressed the pious hope that the
capitalistic magnates of the railways would, in future, be more
extravagant in the purchase of a sufficient quantity of labour-power,
and more 'abstemious,' more 'self-denying,' more 'thrifty,' in the
draining of paid labour-power. 5


From the motley crowd of labourers of all callings, ages, sexes, that
press on us more busily than the souls of the slain on Ulysses, on whom
-- without referring to the Blue books under their arms -- we see at a
glance the mark of over-work, let us take two more figures whose
striking contrast proves that before capital all men are alike -- a
milliner and a blacksmith.

In the last week of June, 1863, all the London daily papers published a
paragraph with the 'sensational' heading, 'Death from simple
over-work.' It dealt with the death of the milliner, Mary Anne Walkley,
20 years of age, employed in a highly-respectable dressmaking
establishment, exploited by a lady with the pleasant name of Elise. The
old, often-told story, 6 was once more recounted. This girl worked, on
an average, 16 1/2 hours, during the season often 30 hours, without a
break, whilst her failing labour-power was revived by occasional
supplies of sherry, port, or coffee. It was just now the height of the
season. It was necessary to conjure up in the twinkling of an eye the
gorgeous dresses for the noble ladies bidden to the ball in honour of
the newly-imported Princess of Wales. Mary Anne Walkley had worked
without intermission for 26 1/2 hours, with 60 other girls, 30 in one
room, that only afforded 1/3 of the cubic feet of air required for
them. At night, they slept in pairs in one of the stifling holes into
which the bedroom was divided by partitions of board.7 And this was one
of the best millinery establishments in London. Mary Anne Walkley fell
ill on the Friday, died on Sunday, without, to the astonishment of
Madame Elise, having previously completed the work in hand. The doctor,
Mr. Keys, called too late to the death-bed, duly bore witness before
the coroner's jury that

'Mary Anne Walkley had died from long hours of work in an over-crowded
work-room, and a too small and badly ventilated bedroom.'

In order to give the doctor a lesson in good manners, the coroner's
jury thereupon brought in a verdict that

'the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there was reason to fear that
her death had been accelerated by over-work in an over-crowded
workroom, &c.'

'Our white slaves,' cried the "Morning Star", the organ of the
Free-traders, Cobden and Bright, 'our white slaves, who are toiled into
the grave, for the most part silently pine and die.' 8


'It is not in dressmakers' rooms that working to death is the order of
the day, but in a thousand other places; in every place I had almost
said, where 'a thriving business' has to be done.... We will take the
blacksmith as a type. If the poets were true, there is no man so
hearty, so merry, as the blacksmith; he rises early and strikes his
sparks before the sun; he eats and drinks and sleeps as no other man.
Working in moderation, he is, in fact, in one of the best of human
positions, physically speaking. But we follow him into the city or
town, and we see the stress of work on that strong man, and what then
is his position in the death-rate of his country. In Marylebone,
blacksmiths die at the rate of 31 per thousand per annum, or 11 above
the mean of the male adults of the country in its entirety. The
occupation, instinctive almost as a portion of human art,
unobjectionable as a branch of human industry, is made by mere excess
of work, the destroyer of the man. He can strike so many blows per day,
walk so many steps, breathe so many breaths, produce so much work, and
live an average, say of fifty years; he is made to strike so many more
blows, to walk so many more steps, to breathe so many more breaths per
day, and to increase altogether a fourth of his life. He meets the
effort; the result is, that producing for a limited time a fourth more
work, he dies at 37 for 50.' 9


=== Section 4: Day and Night Work. The Relay System == =

Constant capital, the means of production, considered from the
standpoint of the creation of surplus value, only exist to absorb
labour, and with every drop of labour a proportional quantity of
surplus labour. While they fail to do this, their mere existence causes
a relative loss to the capitalist, for they represent during the time
they lie fallow, a useless advance of capital. And this loss becomes
positive and absolute as soon as the intermission of their employment
necessitates additional outlay at the recommencement of work. The
prolongation of the working day beyond the limits of the natural day,
into the night, only acts as a palliative. It quenches only in a slight
degree the vampire thirst for the living blood of labour. To
appropriate labour during all the 24 hours of the day is, therefore,
the inherent tendency of capitalist production. But as it is physically
impossible to exploit the same individual labour-power constantly
during the night as well as the day, to overcome this physical
hindrance, an alternation becomes necessary between the workpeople
whose powers are exhausted by day, and those who are used up by night.
This alternation may be effected in various ways; e.g., it may be so
arranged that part of the workers are one week employed on day-work,
the next week on night-work. It is well known that this relay system,
this alternation of two sets of workers, held full sway in the
full-blooded youth-time of the English cotton manufacture, and that at
the present time it still flourishes, among others, in the cotton
spinning of the Moscow district. This 24 hours' process of production
exists to-day as a system in many of the branches of industry of Great
Britain that are still 'free,' in the blast-furnaces, forges,
plate-rolling mills, and other metallurgical establishments in England,
Wales, and Scotland. The working-time here includes, besides the 24
hours of the 6 working days, a great part also of the 24 hours of
Sunday. The workers consist of men and women, adults and children of
both sexes. The ages of the children and young persons run through all
intermediate grades, from 8 (in some cases from 6) to 18. 0


In some branches of industry, the girls and women work through the
night together with the males. 1


Placing on one side the generally injurious influence of night-labour,2
the duration of the process of production, unbroken during the 24
hours, offers very welcome opportunities of exceeding the limits of the
normal working day, e.g., in the branches of industry already
mentioned, which are of an exceedingly fatiguing nature; the official
working day means for each worker usually 12 hours by night or day. But
the over-work beyond this amount is in many cases, to use the words of
the English official report, 'truly fearful.' 3


'It is impossible,' the report continues, 'for any mind to realise the
amount of work described in the following passages as being performed
by boys of from 9 to 12 years of age ... without coming irresistibly to
the conclusion that such abuses of the power of parents and of
employers can no longer be allowed to exist.' 4


"The practice of boys working at all by day and night turns either in
the usual course of things, or at pressing times, seems inevitably to
open the door to their not unfrequently working unduly long hours.
These hours are, indeed, in some cases, not only cruelly but even
incredibly long for children. Amongst a number of boys it will, of
course, not unfrequently happen that one or more are from some cause
absent. When this happens, their place is made up by one or more boys,
who work in the other turn. That this is a well understood system is
plain ... from the answer of the manager of some large rolling-mills,
who, when I asked him how the place of the boys absent from their turn
was made up, 'I daresay, sir, you know that as well as I do,' and
admitted the fact.' 5


'At a rolling-mill where the proper hours were from 6 a.m. to 5 1/2
p.m., a boy worked about four nights every week till 8 1/2 p.m. at least
... and this for six months. Another, at 9 years old, sometimes made
three 12-hour shifts running, and, when 10, has made two days and two
nights running.' A third, 'now 10 ... worked from 6 a.m. till 12 p.m.
three nights, and till 9 p.m. the other nights.' 'Another, now 13, ...
worked from 6 p.m. till 12 noon next day, for a week together, and
sometimes for three shifts together, e.g., from Monday morning till
Tuesday night.' 'Another, now 12, has worked in an iron foundry at
Stavely from 6 a.m. till 12 p.m. for a fortnight on end; could not do
it any more.' 'George Allinsworth, age 9, came here as cellar-boy last
Friday; next morning we had to begin at 3, so I stopped here all night.
Live five miles off. Slept on the floor of the furnace, over head, with
an apron under me, and a bit of a jacket over me. The two other days I
have been here at 6 a.m. Aye! it "is" hot in here. Before I came here I
was nearly a year at the same work at some works in the country. Began
there, too, at 3 on Saturday morning -- always did, but was very gain
home, and could sleep at home. Other days I began at 6 in the morning,
and gi'en over at 6 or 7 in the evening,' &c. 6


Let us now hear how capital itself regards this 24 hours' system. The
extreme forms of the system, its abuse in the 'cruel and incredible'
extension of the working day are naturally passed over in silence.
Capital only speaks of the system in its 'normal' form.

Messrs. Naylor & Vickers, steel manufacturers, who employ between 600
and 700 persons, among whom only 10 per cent are under 18, and of
those, only 20 boys under 18 work in night sets, thus express
themselves:

'The boys do not suffer from the heat. The temperature is probably from
86 degrees to 90 degrees.... At the forges and in the rolling mills the hands work
night and day, in relays, but all the other parts of the work are
day-work, "i.e., "from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. In the forge the hours are from
12 to 12. Some of the hands always work in the night, without any
alternation of day and night work.... We do not find any difference in
the health of those who work regularly by night and those who work by
day, and probably people can sleep better if they have the same period
of rest than if it is changed.... About 20 of the boys under the age of
18 work in the night sets.... We could not well do without lads under
18 working by night. The objection would be the increase in the cost of
production.... Skilled hands and the heads in every department are
difficult to get, but of lads we could get any number.... But from the
small proportion of boys that we employ, the subject "(i.e"., of
restrictions on night-work) is of little importance or interest to us.'
7


Mr. J. Ellis, one of the firm of Messrs. John Brown & Co., steel and
iron works, employing about 3,000 men and boys, part of whose
operations, namely, iron and heavier steel work, goes on night and day
by relays, states 'that in the heavier steel work one or two boys are
employed to a score or two men.' Their concern employs upwards of 500
boys under 18, of whom about 1/3 or 170 are under the age of 13. With
reference to the proposed alteration of the law, Mr. Ellis says:

'I do not think it would be very objectionable to require that no
person under the age of 18 should work more than 12 hours in the 24.
But we do not think that any line could be drawn over the age of 12, at
which boys could be dispensed with for night-work. But we would sooner
be prevented from employing boys under the age of 13, or even so high
as 14, at all, than not be allowed to employ boys that we do have at
night. Those boys who work in the day sets must take their turn in the
night sets also. because the men could not work in the night sets only;
it would ruin their health.... We think, however, that night-work in
alternate weeks is no harm.'

(Messrs. Naylor & Vickers, on the other hand, in conformity with the
interest of their business, considered that periodically changed
night-labour might possibly do more harm than continual night-labour.)

'We find the men who do it, as well as the others who do other work
only by day.... Our objections to not allowing boys under 18 to work at
night, would be on account of the increase of expense, but this is the
only reason.'

(What cynical na√Øvet√©!) 'We think that the increase would be more
than the trade, with due regard to its being successfully carried out,
could fairly bear. (What mealy-mouthed phraseology!) Labour is scarce
here, and might fall short if there were such a regulation.' "(i.e.,
"Ellis Brown & Co. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being
obliged to pay labour-power its full value.) 8


The 'Cyclops Steel and Iron Works,' of Messrs. Cammell & Co., are
concocted on the same large scale as those of the above-mentioned John
Brown & Co. The managing director had handed in his evidence to the
Government Commissioner, Mr. White, in writing. Later he found it
convenient to suppress the MS. when it had been returned to him for
revision. Mr. White, however, has a good memory. He remembered quite
clearly that for the Messrs. Cyclops the forbidding of the night-labour
of children and young persons 'would be impossible, it would be
tantamount to stopping their works,' and yet their business employs
little more than 6% of boys under 18, and less than 1% under 13. 9


On the same subject Mr. E. F. Sanderson, of the firm of Sanderson,
Bros., & Co., steel rolling-mills and forges, Attercliffe, says:

'Great difficulty would be caused by preventing boys under 18 from
working at night. The chief would be the increase of cost from
employing men instead of boys. I cannot say what this would be, but
probably it would not be enough to enable the manufacturers to raise
the price of steel, and consequently it would fall on them, as of
course the men (what queer-headed folk!) would refuse to pay it.'

Mr. Sanderson does not know how much he pays the children, but

'perhaps the younger boys get from 4s. to 5s. a week.... The boys' work
is of a kind for which the strength of the boys is generally
('generally,' of course not always) quite sufficient, and consequently
there would be no gain in the greater strength of the men to
counterbalance the loss, or it would be only in the few cases in which
the metal is heavy. The men would not like so well not to have boys
under them, as men would be less obedient. Besides, boys must begin
young to learn the trade. Leaving day-work alone open to boys would not
answer this purpose.'

And why not? Why could not boys learn their handicraft in the day-time?
Your reason?

'Owing to the men working days and nights in alternate weeks, the men
would be separated half the time from their boys, and would lose half
the profit which they make from them. The training which they give to
an apprentice is considered as part of the return for the boys' labour,
and thus enables the man to get it at a cheaper rate. Each man would
want half of this profit.'

In other words, Messrs. Sanderson would have to pay part of the wages
of the adult men out of their own pockets instead of by the night-work
of the boys. Messrs. Sanderson's profit would thus fall to some extent,
and this is the good Sandersonian reason why boys cannot learn their
handicraft in the day.0 In addition to this, it would throw
night-labour on those who worked instead of the boys, which they would
not be able to stand. The difficulties in fact would be so great that
they would very likely lead to the giving up of night-work altogether,
and 'as far as the work itself is concerned,' says E. F. Sanderson,
'this would suit as well, but -- 'But Messrs. Sanderson have something
else to make besides steel. Steel-making is simply a pretext for
surplus value making. The smelting furnaces, rolling-mills, &c., the
buildings, machinery, iron, coal, &c., have something more to do than
transform themselves into steel. They are there to absorb surplus
labour, and naturally absorb more in 24 hours than in 12. In fact they
give, by grace of God and law, the Sandersons a cheque on the
working-time of a certain number of hands for all the 24 hours of the
day, and they lose their character as capital, are therefore a pure
loss for the Sandersons, as soon as their function of absorbing labour
is interrupted.

'But then there would be the loss from so much expensive machinery,
lying idle half the time, and to get through the amount of work which
we are able to do on the present system, we should have to double our
premises and plant, which would double the outlay.'

But why should these Sandersons pretend to a privilege not enjoyed by
the other capitalists who only work during the day, and whose
buildings, machinery, raw material, therefore lie 'idle' during the
night? E. F. Sanderson answers in the name of all the Sandersons:

'It is true that there is this loss from machinery lying idle in those
manufactories in which work only goes on by day. But the use of
furnaces would involve a further loss in our case. If they were kept up
there would be a waste of fuel (instead of, as now, a waste of the
living substance of the workers), and if they were not, there would be
loss of time in laying the fires and getting the heat up (whilst the
loss of sleeping time, even to children of 8 is a gain of working-time
for the Sanderson tribe), and the furnaces themselves would suffer from
the changes of temperature.' (Whilst those same furnaces suffer nothing
from the day and night change of labour.) 1


=== Section 5: The Struggle for a Normal Working Day. Compulsory Laws
for the Extension of the Working Day from the Middle of the 14th to the
End of the 17th Century == =

'What is a working day? What is the length of time during which capital
may consume the labour-power whose daily value it buys? How far may the
working day be extended beyond the working-time necessary for the
reproduction of labour-power itself?' It has been seen that to these
questions capital replies: the working day contains the full 24 hours,
with the deduction of the few hours of repose without which
labour-power absolutely refuses its services again. Hence it is
self-evident that the labourer is nothing else, his whole life through,
than labour-power, that therefore all his disposable time is by nature
and law labour-time, to be devoted to the self-expansion of capital.
Time for education, for intellectual development, for the fulfilling of
social functions and for social intercourse, for the free-play of his
bodily and mental activity, even the rest time of Sunday (and that in a
country of Sabbatarians!)2 -- moonshine! But in its blind
unrestrainable passion, its were-wolf hunger for surplus labour,
capital oversteps not only the moral, but even the merely physical
maximum bounds of the working day. It usurps the time for growth,
development, and healthy maintenance of the body. It steals the time
required for the consumption of fresh air and sunlight. It higgles over
a meal-time, incorporating it where possible with the process of
production itself, so that food is given to the labourer as to a mere
means of production, as coal is supplied to the boiler, grease and oil
to the machinery. It reduces the sound sleep needed for the
restoration, reparation, refreshment of the bodily powers to just so
many hours of torpor as the revival of an organism, absolutely
exhausted, renders essential. It is not the normal maintenance of the
labour-power which is to determine the limits of the working day; it is
the greatest possible daily expenditure of labour-power, no matter how
diseased, compulsory, and painful it may be, which is to determine the
limits of the labourers' period of repose. Capital cares nothing for
the length of life of labour-power. All that concerns it is simply and
solely the maximum of labour-power, that can be rendered fluent in a
working day. It attains this end by shortening the extent of the
labourer's life, as a greedy farmer snatches increased produce from the
soil by robbing it of its fertility.

The capitalistic mode of production (essentially the production of
surplus value, the absorption of surplus labour), produces thus, with
the extension of the working day, not only the deterioration of human
labour-power by robbing it of its normal, moral and physical,
conditions of development and function. It produces also the premature
exhaustion and death of this labour-power itself.3 It extends the
labourer's time of production during a given period by shortening his
actual life-time.

But the value of the labour-power includes the value of the commodities
necessary for the reproduction of the worker, or for the keeping up of
the working-class. If then the unnatural extension of the working day,
that capital necessarily strives after in its unmeasured passion for
self-expansion, shortens the length of life of the individual labourer,
and therefore the duration of his labour-power, the forces used up have
to be replaced at a more rapid rate and the sum of the expenses for the
reproduction of labour-power will be greater; just as in a machine the
part of its value to be reproduced every day is greater the more
rapidly the machine is worn out. It would seem therefore that the
interest capital itself points in the direction of a normal working
day.

The slave-owner buys his labourer as he buys his horse. If he loses his
slave, he loses capital that can only be restored by new outlay in the
slave-mart.

But 'the rice-grounds of Georgia, or the swamps of the Mississippi may
be fatally injurious to the human constitution; but the waste of human
life which the cultivation of these districts necessitates, is not so
great that it cannot be repaired from the teeming preserves of Virginia
and Kentucky. Considerations of economy, moreover, which, under a
natural system, afford some security for humane treatment by
identifying the master's interest with the slave's preservation, when
once trading in slaves is practiced, become reasons for racking to the
uttermost the toil of the slave; for, when his place can at once be
supplied from foreign preserves, the duration of his life becomes a
matter of less moment than its productiveness while it lasts. It is
accordingly a maxim of slave management, in slave-importing countries,
that the most effective economy is that which takes out of the human
chattel in the shortest space of time the utmost amount of exertion it
is capable of putting forth. It is in tropical culture, where annual
profits often equal the whole capital of plantations, that negro life
is most recklessly sacrificed. It is the agriculture of the West
Indies, which has been for centuries prolific of fabulous wealth, that
has engulfed millions of the African race. It is in Cuba, at this day,
whose revenues are reckoned by millions, and whose planters are
princes, that we see in the servile class, the coarsest fare, the most
exhausting and unremitting toil, and even the absolute destruction of a
portion of its numbers every year.'4

"Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur" . For slave-trade read
labour-market, for Kentucky and Virginia, Ireland and the agricultural
districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, for Africa, Germany. We
heard how over-work thinned the ranks of the bakers in London.
Nevertheless, the London labour-market is always over-stocked with
German and other candidates for death in the bakeries. Pottery, as we
saw, is one of the shortest-lived industries. Is there any want
therefore of potters? Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of modern pottery,
himself originally a common workman, said in 1785 before the House of
Commons that the whole trade employed from 15,000 to 20,000 people. 5
In the year 1861 the population alone of the town centres of this
industry in Great Britain numbered 101,302.

'The cotton trade has existed for ninety years.... It has existed for
three generations of the English race, and I believe I may safely say
that during that period it has destroyed nine generations of factory
operatives.' 6


No doubt in certain epochs of feverish activity the labour-market shows
significant gaps. In 1834, "e.g". But then the manufacturers proposed
to the Poor Law Commissioners that they should send the
'surplus-population' of the agricultural districts to the north, with
the explanation 'that the manufacturers would absorb and use it up.' 7


Agents were appointed with the consent of the Poor Law Commissioners.
... An office was set up in Manchester, to which lists were sent of
those workpeople in the agricultural districts wanting employment, and
their names were registered in books. The manufacturers attended at
these offices, and selected such persons as they chose; when they had
selected such persons as their 'wants required', they gave instructions
to have them forwarded to Manchester, and they were sent, ticketed like
bales of goods, by canals, or with carriers, others tramping on the
road, and many of them were found on the way lost and half-starved.
This system had grown up unto a regular trade. This House will hardly
believe it, but I tell them, that this traffic in human flesh was as
well kept up, they were in effect as regularly sold to these
manufacturers as slaves are sold to the cotton-grower in the United
States.... In 1860, 'the cotton trade was at its zenith.' ... The
manufacturers again found that they were short of hands.... They
applied to the 'flesh agents, as they are called. Those agents sent to
the southern downs of England, to the pastures of Dorsetshire, to the
glades of Devonshire, to the people tending kine in Wiltshire, but they
sought in vain. The surplus-population was 'absorbed.''


The "Bury Guardian" said, on the completion of the French treaty, that
'10,000 additional hands could be absorbed by Lancashire, and that
30,000 or 40,000 will be needed.' After the 'flesh agents and
sub-agents' had in vain sought through the agricultural districts,


'a deputation came up to London, and waited on the right hon. gentleman
with a view of obtaining poor children from certain union houses for
the mills of Lancashire.' 8


What experience shows to the capitalist generally is a constant excess
of population, i.e., an excess in relation to the momentary
requirements of surplus labour-absorbing capital, although this excess
is made up of generations of human beings stunted, short-lived, swiftly
replacing each other, plucked, so to say, before maturity.9 And,
indeed, experience shows to the intelligent observer with what
swiftness and grip the capitalist mode of production, dating,
historically speaking, only from yesterday, has seized the vital power
of the people by the very root -- shows how the degeneration of the
industrial population is only retarded by the constant absorption of
primitive and physically uncorrupted elements from the country -- shows
how even the country labourers, in spite of fresh air and the principle
of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, and only
permits the survival of the strongest, are already beginning to die
off. 0 Capital that has such good reasons for denying the sufferings of
the legions of workers that surround it, is in practice moved as much
and as little by the sight of the coming degradation and final
depopulation of the human race, as by the probable fall of the earth
into the sun. In every stockjobbing swindle every one knows that some
time or other the crash must come, but every one hopes that it may fall
on the head of his neighbour, after he himself has caught the shower of
gold and placed it in safety. " Apr√®s moi le d√©luge! is " the
watchword of every capitalist and of every capitalist nation. Hence
Capital is reckless of the health or length of life of the labourer,
unless under compulsion from society.1 To the out-cry as to the
physical and mental degradation, the premature death, the torture of
over-work, it answers: Ought these to trouble us since they increase
our profits? But looking at things as a whole, all this does not,
indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the individual capitalist.
Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist production,
in the shape of external coercive laws having power over every
individual capitalist.2

The establishment of a normal working day is the result of centuries of
struggle between capitalist and labourer. The history of this struggle
shows two opposed tendencies. Compare, e.g., the English factory
legislation of our time with the English labour Statutes from the 14th
century to well into the middle of the 18th.3 Whilst the modern Factory
Acts compulsorily shortened the working day, the earlier statutes tried
to lengthen it by compulsion. Of course the pretensions of capital in
embryo -- when, beginning to grow, it secures the right of absorbing a
"quantum sufficit" of surplus labour, not merely by the force of
economic relations, but by the help of the State -- appear very modest
when put face to face with the concessions that, growling and
struggling, it has to make in its adult condition. It takes centuries
ere the 'free' labourer, thanks to the development of capitalistic
production, agrees, "i.e., is" compelled by social conditions, to sell
the whole of his active life. his very capacity for work, for the price
of the necessaries of life, his birth-right for a mess of pottage.
Hence it is natural that the lengthening of the working day, which
capital, from the middle of the 14th to the end of the 17th century,
tries to impose by State-measures on adult labourers, approximately
coincides with the shortening of the working day which, in the second
half of the 19th century, has here and there been effected by the State
to prevent the coining of children's blood into capital. That which
to-day, "e.g"., in the State of Massachusetts, until recently the
freest State of the North-American Republic, has been proclaimed as the
statutory limit of the labour of children under 12, was in England,
even in the middle of the 17th century, the normal working day of
able-bodied artisans, robust labourers, athletic blacksmiths.4

The first 'Statute of Labourers' (23 Edward III., 1349) found its
immediate pretext (not its cause, for legislation of this kind lasts
centuries after the pretext for it has disappeared) in the great plague
that decimated the people, so that, as a Tory writer says, 'The
difficulty of getting men to work on reasonable terms "(i.e"., at a
price that left their employers a reasonable quantity of surplus
labour) grew to such a height as to be quite intolerable.' 5 Reasonable
wages were, therefore, fixed by law as well as the limits of the
working day. The latter point, the only one that here interests us, is
repeated in the Statute of 1496 (Henry VII.). The working day for all
artificers and field labourers from March to September ought, according
to this statute (which, however, could not be enforced), to last from 5
in the morning to between 7 and 8 in the evening. But the meal-times
consist of 1 hour for breakfast, 1 1/2 hours for dinner, and  1/2 an hour
for 'noon-meate,' i.e., exactly twice as much as under the factory acts
now in force.6 In winter, work was to last from 5 in the morning until
dark, with the same intervals. A statute of Elizabeth of 1562 leaves
the length of the working day for all labourers 'hired for daily or
weekly wage' untouched, but aims at limiting the intervals to 2 1/2
hours in the summer, or to 2 in the winter. Dinner is only to last 1
hour, and the 'afternoon-sleep of half an hour' is only allowed between
the middle of May and the middle of August. For every hour of absence
1d. is to be subtracted from the wage. In practice, however, the
conditions were much more favourable to the labourers than in the
statute-book. William Petty, the father of Political Economy, and to
some extent the founder of Statistics, says in a work that he published
in the last third of the 17th century:

'Labouring-men (then meaning field-labourers) work 10 hours per diem,
and make 20 meals per week, viz., 3 a day for working days, and 2 on
Sundays; whereby it is plain, that if they could fast on Friday nights,
and dine in one hour and an half, whereas they take two, from eleven to
one; thereby thus working  1/20 more, and spending  1/20 less, the
above-mentioned (tax) might be raised.' 7


Was not Dr. Andrew Ure right in crying down the 12 hours' bill of 1833
as a retrogression to the times of the dark ages? It is true these
regulations contained in the statute mentioned by Petty, apply also to
apprentices. But the condition of child-labour, even at the end of the
17th century, is seen from the following complaint:

''Tis not their practice (in Germany) as with us in this kingdom, to
bind an apprentice for seven years; three or four is their common
standard: and the reason is, because they are educated from their
cradle to something of employment, which renders them the more apt and
docile, and consequently the more capable of attaining to a ripeness
and quicker proficiency in business. Whereas our youth, here in
England, being bred to nothing before they come to be apprentices, make
a very slow progress and require much longer time wherein to reach the
perfection of accomplished artists.'8

Still, during the greater part of the 18th century, up to the epoch of
Modern Industry and machinism, capital in England had not succeeded in
seizing for itself, by the payment of the weekly value of labour-power,
the whole week of the labourer, with the exception, however, of the
agricultural labourers. The fact that they could live for a whole week
on the wage of four days, did not appear to the labourers a sufficient
reason that they should work the other two days for the capitalist. One
party of English economists, in the interest of capital, denounces this
obstinacy in the most violent manner, another party defends the
labourers. Let us listen, "e.g., to" the contest between Postlethwayt
whose Dictionary of Trade then had the same reputation as the kindred
works of MacCulloch and MacGregor to-day, and the author (already
quoted) of the 'Essay on Trade and Commerce.' 9


Postlethwayt says among other things:

'We cannot put an end to those few observations, without noticing that
trite remark in the mouth of too many; that if the industrious poor can
obtain enough to maintain themselves in five days, they will not work
the whole six. Whence they infer the necessity of even the necessaries
of life being made dear by taxes, or any other means, to compel the
working artisan and manufacturer to labour the whole six days in the
week, without ceasing. I must beg leave to differ in sentiment from
those great politicians, who contend for the perpetual slavery of the
working people of this kingdom; they forget the vulgar adage, all work
and no play. Have not the English boasted of the ingenuity and
dexterity of her working artists and manufacturers which have
heretofore given credit and reputation to British wares in general?
What has this been owing to? To nothing more probably than the
relaxation of the working people in their own way. Were they obliged to
toil the year round, the whole six days in the week, in a repetition of
the same work, might it not blunt their ingenuity, and render them
stupid instead of alert and dexterous; and might not our workmen lose
their reputation instead of maintaining it by such eternal slavery? ...
And what sort of workmanship could we expect from such hard-driven
animals? ... Many of them will execute as much work in four days as a
Frenchman will in five or six. But if Englishmen are to be eternal
drudges, 'tis to be feared they will degenerate below the Frenchmen. As
our people are famed for bravery in war, do we not say that it is owing
to good English roast beef and pudding in their bellies, as well as
their constitutional spirit of liberty? And why may not the superior
ingenuity and dexterity of, our artists and manufacturers, be owing to
that freedom and liberty to direct themselves in their own way, and I
hope we shall never have them deprived of such privileges and that good
living from whence their ingenuity no less than their courage may
proceed.'0

Thereupon the author of the 'Essay on Trade and Commerce' replies:

'If the making of every seventh day an holiday is supposed to be of
divine institution, as it implies the appropriating the other six days
to labour' (he means capital as we shall soon see) 'surely it will not
be thought cruel to enforce it .... That mankind in general, are
naturally inclined to ease and indolence, we fatally experience to be
true, from the conduct of our manufacturing populace, who do not
labour, upon an average, above four days in a week, unless provisions
happen to be very dear.... Put all the necessaries of the poor under
one denomination; for instance, call them all wheat, or suppose that
... the bushel of wheat shall cost five shillings and that he (a
manufacturer) earns a shilling by his labour, he then would be obliged
to work five days only in a week. If the bushel of wheat should cost
but four shillings, he would be obliged to work but four days; but as
wages in this kingdom are much higher in proportion to the price of
necessaries ... the manufacturer, who labours four days, has a surplus
of money to live idle with the rest of the week . ... I hope I have
said enough to make it appear that the moderate labour of six days in a
week is no slavery. Our labouring people do this, and to all appearance
are the happiest of all our labouring poor,1 but the Dutch do this in
manufactures, and appear to be a very happy people. The French do so,
when holidays do not intervene.2 But our populace have adopted a
notion, that as Englishmen they enjoy a birthright privilege of being
more free and independent than in any country in Europe. Now this idea,
as far as it may affect the bravery of our troops, may be of some use;
but the less the manufacturing poor have of it, certainly the better
for themselves and for the State. The labouring people should never)
think themselves independent of their superiors.... It is extremely
dangerous to encourage mobs in a commercial state like ours, where,
perhaps, seven parts out of eight of the whole, are people with little
or no property. The cure will not be perfect, till our manufacturing
poor are contented to labour six days for the same sum which they now
earn in four days.' 3


To this end, and for 'extirpating idleness debauchery and excess,'
promoting a spirit of industry, 'lowering the price of labour in our
manufactories, and easing the lands of the heavy burden of poor's
rates,' our 'faithful Eckart' of capital proposes this approved device:
to shut up such labourers as become dependent on public support, in a
word, paupers, in 'an "ideal workhouse." Such ideal workhouse must be
made a 'House of Terror,' and not an asylum for the poor, 'where they
are to be plentifully fed, warmly and decently clothed, and where they
do but little work.' 4 In this 'House of Terror,' this 'ideal
workhouse, the poor shall work 14 hours in a day, allowing proper time
for meals, in such manner that there shall remain 12 hours of
neat-labour.'5

Twelve working-hours daily in the Ideal Workhouse, in the 'House of
Terror' of 1770! 63 years later, in 1833, when the English Parliament
reduced the working day for children of 13 to 18, in four branches of
industry to 12 full hours, the judgment day of English Industry had
dawned! In 1852, when Louis Bonaparte sought to secure his position
with the bourgeoisie by tampering with the legal working day, the
French working people cried out with one voice 'the law that limits the
working day to 12 hours is the one good that has remained to us of the
legislation of the Republic!' 6 At Z√ºrich the work of children over
10, is limited to 12 hours; in Aargau in 1862, the work of children
between 13 and 16, was reduced from 12 1/2 to 12 hours; in Austria in
1860, for children between 14 and 16, the same reduction was made.7
'What a progress,' since 1770! Macaulay would shout with exultation!

The 'House of Terror' for paupers of which the capitalistic soul of
1770 only dreamed, was realised a few years later in the shape of a
gigantic 'Workhouse' for the industrial worker himself. It is called
the Factory. And the ideal this time fades before the reality.

=== Section 6: The Struggle for a Normal Working Day. Compulsory
Limitation by Law of the Working-Time. English Factory Acts, 1833 == =

After capital had taken centuries in extending the working day to its
normal maximum limit, and then beyond this to the limit of the natural
day of 12 hours,8 there followed on the birth of machinism and modern
industry in the last third of the 18th century, a violent encroachment
like that of an avalanche in its intensity and extent. All bounds of
morals and nature, age and sex, day and night, were broken down. Even
the ideas of day and night, of rustic simplicity in the old statutes,
became so confused that an English judge, as late as 1860, needed a
quite Talmudic sagacity to explain 'judicially' what was day and what
was night.9 Capital celebrated its orgies.

As soon as the working-class, stunned at first by the noise and turmoil
of the new system of production, recovered, in some measure, its
senses, its resistance began, and first in the native land of
machinism, in England. For 30 years, however, the concessions conquered
by the workpeople were purely nominal. Parliament passed 5 labour Laws
between 1802 and 1833, but was shrewd enough not to vote a penny for
their carrying out, for the requisite officials, &c. 00


They remained a dead letter. 'The fact is, that prior to the Act of
1833, young persons and children were worked all night, all day, or
both "ad libitum".'01

A normal working day for modern industry only dates from the Factory
Act of 1833, which included cotton, wool, flax, and silk factories.
Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of capital than the
history of the English Factory Acts from 1833 to 1864.

The Act of 1833 declares the ordinary factory working day to be from
half-past five in the morning to half-past eight in the evening and
within these limits, a period of 15 hours, it is lawful to employ young
persons "(i.e"., persons between 13 and 18 years of age), at any time
of the day, provided no one individual young person should work more
than 12 hours in any one day, except in certain cases especially
provided for. The 6th section of the Act provided. 'That there shall be
allowed in the course of every day not less than one and a half hours
for meals to every such person restricted as hereinbefore provided.'
The employment of children under 9, with exceptions mentioned later was
forbidden; the work of children between 9 and 13 was limited to 8 hours
a day, night-work, "i.e"., according to this Act, work between 8:30
p.m. and 5:30 a.m., was forbidden for all persons between 9 and 18.

The law-makers were so far from wishing to trench on the freedom of
capital to exploit adult labour-power, or, as they called it, 'the
freedom of labour,' that they created a special system in order to
prevent the Factory Acts from having a consequence so outrageous.

'The great evil of the factory system as at present conducted,' says
the first report of the Central Board of the Commission of June 28th
1833, 'has appeared to us to be that it entails the necessity of
continuing the labour of children to the utmost length of that of the
adults. The only remedy for this evil, short of the limitation of the
labour of adults which would, in our opinion, create an evil greater
than that which is sought to be remedied, appears to be the plan of
working double sets of children.'

... Under the name of System of Relays, this 'plan' was therefore
carried out, so that, e.g., from 5.30 a.m. until 1.30 in the afternoon,
one set of children between 9 and 13, and from 1.30 p.m. to 8.30 in the
evening another set were 'put to,' &c.

In order to reward the manufacturers for having, in the most barefaced
way, ignored all the Acts as to children's labour passed during the
last twenty-two years, the pill was yet further gilded for them.
Parliament decreed that after March 1st, 1834, no child under 11, after
March 1st 1835, no child under 12, and after March 1st, 1836, no child
under 13 was to work more than eight hours in a factory. This
'liberalism,' so full of consideration for 'capital,' was the more
noteworthy as. Dr. Farre, Sir A. Carlisle, Sir B. Brodie, Sir C. Bell,
Mr. Guthrie, &c., in a word, the most distinguished physicians and
surgeons in London, had declared in their evidence before the House of
Commons, that there was danger in delay. Dr. Farre expressed himself
still more coarsely.

'Legislation is necessary for the prevention of death, in any form in
which it can be prematurely inflicted, and certainly this (i.e., the
factory method) must be viewed as a most cruel mode of inflicting it.'

That same 'reformed' Parliament, which in its delicate consideration
for the manufacturers, condemned children under 13, for years to come,
to 72 hours of work per week in the Factory Hell, on the other hand, in
the Emancipation Act, which also administered freedom drop by drop,
forbade the planters, from the outset, to work any negro slave more
than 45 hours a week.

But in no wise conciliated, capital now began a noisy agitation that
went on for several years. It turned chiefly on the age of those who,
under the name of children, were limited to 8 hours' work, and were
subject to a certain amount of compulsory education. According to
capitalistic anthropology, the age of childhood ended at 10, or at the
outside, at 11. The more nearly the time approached for the coming into
full force of the Factory Act, the fatal year 1836, the more wildly
raged the mob of manufacturers. They managed, in fact, to intimidate
the government to such an extent that in 1835 it proposed to lower the
limit of the age of childhood from 13 to 12. In the meantime the
pressure from without grew more threatening. Courage failed the House
of Commons. It refused to throw children of 13 under the Juggernaut Car
of capital for more than 8 hours a day, and the Act of 1833 came into
full operation. It remained unaltered until June, 1844.

In the ten years during which it regulated factory work, first in part,
and then entirely, the official reports of the factory inspectors teem
with complaints as to the impossibility of putting the Act into force.
As the law of 1833 left it optional with the lords of capital during
the 15 hours, from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 p.m., to make every 'young
person,' and 'every child' begin, break off, resume, or end his 12 or 8
hours at any moment they liked, and also permitted them to assign to
different persons, different times for meals, these gentlemen soon
discovered a new 'system of relays,' by which the labour-horses were
not changed at fixed stations, but were constantly re-harnessed at
changing stations. We do not pause longer on the beauty of this system,
as we shall have to return to it later. But this much is clear at the
first glance: that this system annulled the whole Factory Act, not only
in the spirit, but in the letter. How could factory inspectors, with
this complex bookkeeping in respect to each individual child or young
person, enforce the legally determined work-time and the granting of
the legal mealtimes? In a great many of the factories, the old
brutalities soon blossomed out again unpunished. In an interview with
the Home Secretary (1844), the factory inspectors demonstrated the
impossibility of any control under the newly invented relay system.02
In the meantime, however, circumstances had greatly changed. The
factory hands, especially since 1838, had made the Ten Hours' Bill
their economic, as they had made the Charter their political,
election-cry. Some of the manufacturers, even, who had managed their
factories in conformity with the Act of 1833, overwhelmed Parliament
with memorials on the immoral competition of their false brethren whom
greater impudence, or more fortunate local circumstances, enabled to
break the law. Moreover, however much the individual manufacturer might
give the rein to his old lust for gain, the spokesmen and political
leaders of the manufacturing class ordered a change of front and of
speech towards the workpeople. They had entered upon the contest for
the repeal of the Corn Laws, and needed the workers to help them to
victory. They promised therefore, not only a double-sized loaf of
bread, but the enactment of the Ten Hours' Bill in the Free-trade
millennium.03 Thus they still less dared to oppose a measure intended
only to make the law of 1833 a reality. Threatened in their holiest
interest, the rent of land, the Tories thundered with philanthropic
indignation against the 'nefarious practices'04 of their foes.

This was the origin of the additional Factory Act of June 7th, 1844. It
came into effect on September 10th, 1844. It places under protection a
new category of workers, viz., the women over 18. They were placed in
every respect on the same footing as the young persons, their work time
limited to twelve hours, their night-labour forbidden, &c. For the
first time, legislation saw itself compelled to control directly and
officially the labour of adults. In the Factory Report of 1844-1845, it
is said with irony:

'No instances have come to my knowledge of adult women having expressed
any regret at their "rights" being thus far interfered with.' 05 The
working-time of children under 13 was reduced to 61, and in certain
circumstances to 7 hours a-day.06

To get rid of the abuses of the 'spurious relay system,' the law
established besides others the following important regulations: --

'That the hours of work of children and young persons shall be reckoned
from the time when any child or young person shall begin to work in the
morning.'

So that if A, "e.g., "begins work at 8 in the morning, and B at 10, B's
work-day must nevertheless end at the same hour as A's. 'The time shall
be regulated by a public clock,' for example, the nearest railway
clock, by which the factory clock is to be set. The occupier is to hang
up a 'legible' printed notice stating the hours for the beginning and
ending of work and the times allowed for the several meals. Children
beginning work before 12 noon may not be again employed after I p.m.
The afternoon shift must therefore consist of other children than those
employed in the morning. Of the hour and a half for meal-times,

'one hour thereof at the least shall be given before three of the clock
in the afternoon ... and at the same period of the day. No child or
young person shall be employed more than five hours before I p.m.
without an interval for meal-time of at least 30 minutes. No child or
young person shall be employed or allowed to remain in any room in
which any manufacturing process is then carried on,' &c.

It has been seen that these minutiae, which, with military uniformity,
regulate by stroke of the clock the times, limits, pauses of the work
were not at all the products of Parliamentary fancy. They developed
gradually out of circumstances as natural laws of the modern mode of
production. Their formulation, official recognition, and proclamation
by the State, were the result of a long struggle of classes. One of
their first consequences was that in practice the working day of the
adult males in factories became subject to the same limitations, since
in most processes of production the co-operation of the children. young
persons, and women is indispensable. On the whole, therefore, during
the period from 1844 to 1847, the 12 hours' working day became general
and uniform in all branches of industry under the Factory Act.

The manufacturers, however, did not allow this 'progress' without a
compensating 'retrogression.' At their instigation the House of Commons
reduced the minimum age for exploitable children from 9 to 8, in order
to assure that additional supply of factory children which is due to
capitalists, according to divine and human law.07

The years 1846-47 are epoch-making in the economic history of England.
The Repeal of the Corn Laws, and of the duties on cotton and other raw
material; Free-trade proclaimed as the guiding star of legislation; in
a word, the arrival of the millennium. On the other hand, in the same
years, the Chartist movement and the 10 hours' agitation reached their
highest point. They found allies in the Tories panting for revenge.
Despite the fanatical opposition of the army of perjured Free-traders,
with Bright and Cobden at their head, the Ten Hours' Bill, struggled
for so long, went through Parliament.

The new Factory Act of June 8th, 1847, enacted that on July 1st, 1847,
there should be a preliminary shortening of the working day for 'young
persons' (from 13 to 18), and all females to 11 hours, but that on May
1st, 1848, there should be a definite limitation of the working day to
10 hours. In other respects, the Act only amended and completed the
Acts of 1833 and 1844.

Capital now entered upon a preliminary campaign in order to hinder the
Act from coming into full force on May 1st, 1848. And the workers
themselves, under the presence that they had been taught by experience,
were to help in the destruction of their own work. The moment was
cleverly chosen.

'It must be remembered, too, that there has been more than two years of
great suffering (in consequence of the terrible crisis of 1846-47)
among the factory operatives, from many mills having worked short time,
and many being altogether closed. A considerable number of the
operatives must therefore be in very narrow circumstances many, it is
to be feared, in debt; so that it might fairly have been presumed that
at the present time they would prefer working the longer time, in order
to make up for past losses, perhaps to pay off debts, or get their
furniture out of pawn, or replace that sold, or to get a new supply of
clothes for themselves and their families.'08


The manufacturers tried to aggravate the natural effect of these
circumstances by a general reduction of wages by 10%. This was done
so to say, to celebrate the inauguration of the new Free-trade era.
Then followed a further reduction of 8 1/3% as soon as the working
day was shortened to 11, and a reduction of double that amount as soon
as it was finally shortened to 10 hours. Wherever, therefore,
circumstances allowed it, a reduction of wages of at least 25% took
place.09 Under such favourably prepared conditions the agitation among
the factory workers for the repeal of the Act of 1847 was begun.
Neither lies, bribery, nor threats were spared in this attempt. But all
was in vain. Concerning the half-dozen petitions in which workpeople
were made to complain of 'their oppression by the Act,' the petitioners
themselves declared under oral examination, that their signatures had
been extorted from them. 'They felt themselves oppressed, but not
exactly by the Factory Act.'10 But if the manufacturers did not succeed
in making the workpeople speak as they wished, they themselves shrieked
all the louder in press and Parliament in the name of the workpeople.
They denounced the Factory Inspectors as a kind of revolutionary
commissioners like those of the French National Convention ruthlessly
sacrificing the unhappy factory workers to their humanitarian crotchet.
This manoeuvre also failed. Factory Inspector Leonard Horner conducted
in his own person, and through his sub-inspectors, many examinations of
witnesses in the factories of Lancashire. About 70% of the workpeople
examined declared in favour of 10 hours, a much smaller percentage in
favour of 11, and an altogether insignificant minority for the old 12
hours.11 Another 'friendly' dodge was to make the adult males work 12
to 15 hours, and then to blazon abroad this fact as the best proof of
what the proletariat desired in its heart of hearts. But the 'ruthless'
Factory Inspector Leonard Horner was again to the fore. The majority of
the 'over-times' declared:

'They would much prefer working ten hours for less wages, but that they
had no choice; that so many were out of employment (so many spinners
getting very low wages by having to work as piecers, being unable to do
better), that if they refused to work the longer time, others would
immediately get their places, so that it was a question with them of
agreeing to work the longer time, or of being thrown out of employment
altogether.'12

The preliminary campaign of capital thus came to grief, and the Ten
Hours' Act came into force May 1st, 1848. But meanwhile the fiasco of
the Chartist party whose leaders were imprisoned, and whose
organisation was dismembered, had shaken the confidence of the English
working-class in its own strength. Soon after this the June
insurrection in Paris and its bloody suppression united, in England as
on the Continent, all fractions of the ruling classes, landlords and
capitalists, stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers, Protectionists and
Freetraders, government and opposition, priests and freethinkers, young
whores and old nuns, under the common cry for the salvation of
Property, Religion, the Family and Society. The working-class was
everywhere proclaimed, placed under a ban, under a virtual law of
suspects. The manufacturers had no need any longer to restrain
themselves. They broke out in open revolt not only against the Ten
Hours' Act, but against the whole of the legislation that since 1833
had aimed at restricting in some measure the 'free' exploitation of
labour-power. It was a pro-slavery rebellion in miniature, carried on
for over two years with a cynical recklessness, a terrorist energy all
the cheaper because the rebel capitalist risked nothing except the skin
of his 'hands.'

To understand that which follows we must remember that the Factory Acts
of 1833, 1844, and 1847 were all three in force so far as the one did
not amend the other: that not one of these limited the working day of
the male worker over 18, and that since 1833 the 15 hours from 5.30
a.m. to 8.30 p.m. had remained the legal 'day,' within the limits of
which at first the 12, and later the 10 hours' labour of young persons
and women had to be performed under the prescribed conditions.

The manufacturers began by here and there discharging a part of, in
many cases half of the young persons and women employed by them, and
then, for the adult males, restoring the almost obsolete night-work.
The Ten Hours' Act, they cried, leaves no other alternative.13

Their second step dealt with the legal pauses for meals. Let us hear
the Factory Inspectors.


'Since the restriction of the hours of work to ten, the factory
occupiers maintain, although they have not yet practically gone the
whole length, that supposing the hours of work to be from 9 a.m. to 7
p.m. they fulfil the provisions of the statutes by allowing an hour
before 9 a.m. and half an hour after 7 p.m. . In some cases they now
allow an hour, or half an hour for dinner, insisting at the same time,
that they are not bound to allow any part of the hour and a half in the
course of the factory working day.'14 The manufacturers maintained
therefore that the scrupulously strict provisions of the Act of 1844
with regard to meal-times only gave the operatives permission to eat
and drink before coming into, and after leaving the factory -- i.e., at
home. And why should not the workpeople eat their dinner before 9 in
the morning? The crown lawyers, however, decided that the prescribed
meal-times

'must be in the interval during the working-hours, and that it will not
be lawful to work for 10 hours continuously, from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m.,
without any interval.'15

After these pleasant demonstrations, Capital preluded its revolt by a
step which agreed with the letter of the law of 1844, and was therefore
legal.

The Act of 1844 certainly prohibited the employment after 1 p.m. of
such children, from 8 to 13, as had been employed before noon. But it
did not regulate in any way the 6 1/2 hours' work of the children whose
work-time began at 12 midday or later. Children of 8 might, if they
began work at noon, be employed from 12 to 1, 1 hour; from 2 to 4 in
the afternoon, 2 hours; from 5 to 8.30 in the evening, 3 1/2 hours; in
all, the legal 6 1/2 hours. Or better still. In order to make their work
coincide with that of the adult male labourers up to 8.30 p.m., the
manufacturers only had to give them no work till 2 in the afternoon,
they could then keep them in the factory without intermission till 8.30
in the evening.

'And it is now expressly admitted that the practice exists in England
from the desire of mill-owners to have their machinery at work for more
than 10 hours a-day, to keep the children at work with male adults
after all the young persons and women have left, and until 8.30 p.m. if
the factory-owners choose.'16

Workmen and factory inspectors protested on hygienic and moral grounds,
but Capital answered:

'My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,The penalty and forfeit of my
bond.'

In fact, according to statistics laid before the House of Commons on
July 26th, 1850, in spite of all protests, on July 15th, 1850, 3,742
children were subjected to this 'practice' in 257 factories.17 Still,
this was not enough. The Lynx eye of Capital discovered that the Act of
1844 did not allow 5 hours' work before mid-day without a pause of at
least 30 minutes for refreshment, but prescribed nothing of the kind
for work after mid-day. Therefore, it claimed and obtained the
enjoyment not only of making children of 8 drudge without intermission
from 2 to 8.30 p.m., but also of making them hunger during that time.

'Ay, his heart.So says the bond.'

This Shylock-clinging18 to the letter of the law of 1844, so far as it
regulated children's labour, was but to lead up to an open revolt
against the same law, so far as it regulated the labour of 'young
persons and women.' It will be remembered that the abolition of the
'false relay system' was the chief aim and object of that law. The
masters began their revolt with the simple declaration that the
sections of the Act of 1844 which prohibited the "ad libitum" use of
young persons and women in such short fractions of the day of 15 hours
as the employer chose, were 'comparatively harmless' so long as the
work-time was fixed at 12 hours. But under the Ten Hours' Act they were
a 'grievous hardship.' 19 They informed the inspectors in the coolest
manner that they should place themselves above the letter of the law,
and re-introduce the old system on their own account.20 They were
acting in the interests of the ill-advised operatives themselves, 'in
order to be able to pay them higher wages.'

"This was the only possible plan by which to maintain, under the Ten
Hours' Act, the industrial supremacy of Great Britain.' 'Perhaps it may
be a little difficult to detect irregularities under the relay system;
but what of that? Is the great manufacturing interest of this country
to be treated as a secondary matter in order to save some little
trouble to Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors of Factories?' 21


All these shifts naturally were of no avail. The Factory Inspectors
appealed to the Law Courts. But soon such a cloud of dust in the way of
petitions from the masters overwhelmed the Home Secretary, Sir George
Grey, that in a circular of August 5th, 1848, he recommends the
inspectors not

'to lay informations against mill-owners for a breach of the letter of
the Act, or for employment of young persons by relays in cases in which
there is no reason to believe that such young persons have been
actually employed for a longer period than that sanctioned by law.'
Hereupon, Factory Inspector J. Stuart allowed the so-called relay
system during the 15 hours of the factory day throughout Scotland,
where it soon flourished again as of old. The English Factory
Inspectors, on the other hand, declared that the Home Secretary had no
power dictatorially to suspend the law, and continued their legal
proceedings against the pro-slavery rebellion.

But what was the good of summoning the capitalists when the Courts in
this case the country magistrates -- Cobbett's 'Great Unpaid' --
acquitted them? In these tribunals, the masters sat in judgment on
themselves An example. One Eskrigge, cotton-spinner, of the firm of
Kershaw, Leese, & Co., had laid before the Factory Inspector of his
district the scheme of a relay system intended for his mill. Receiving
a refusal, he at first kept quiet. A few months later, an individual
named Robinson, also a cotton-spinner, and if not his Man Friday, at
all events related to Eskrigge, appeared before the borough magistrates
of Stockport on a charge of introducing the identical plan of relays
invented by Eskrigge. Four Justices sat, among them three
cottonspinners, at their head this same inevitable Eskrigge. Eskrigge
acquitted Robinson, and now was of opinion that what was right for
Robinson was fair for Eskrigge. Supported by his own legal decision, he
introduced the system at once into his own factory.22 Of course, the
composition of this tribunal was in itself a violation of the law.23

These judicial farces, exclaims Inspector Howell, 'urgently call for a
remedy -- either that the law should be so altered as to be made to
conform to these decisions, or that it should be administered by a less
fallible tribunal, whose decisions would conform to the law ... when
these cases are brought forward. I long for a stipendiary
magistrate.'24

The crown lawyers declared the masters' interpretation of the Act of
1848 absurd. But the Saviours of Society would not allow themselves to
be turned from their purpose. Leonard Horner reports,

'Having endeavoured to enforce the Act ... by ten prosecutions in seven
magisterial divisions, and having been supported by the magistrates in
one case only ... I considered it useless to prosecute more for this
evasion of the law. That part of the Act of 1848 which was framed for
securing uniformity in the hours of work, ... is thus no longer in
force in my district (Lancashire). Neither have the sub-inspectors or
myself any means of satisfying ourselves, when we inspect a mill
working by shifts, that the young persons and women are not working
more than 10 hours a-day.... In a return of the 30th April, ... of
millowners working by shifts, the number amounts to 114, and has been
for some time rapidly increasing. In general, the time of working the
mill is extended to 13 1/2 hours' from 6 a.m. to 7 1/2 p.m., .... in some
instances it amounts to 15 hours, from 5 1/2 a.m. to 8 1/2 p.m.'25

Already, in December, 1848, Leonard Horner had a list of 65
manufacturers and 29 overlookers who unanimously declared that no
system of supervision could, under this relay system, prevent enormous
over-work.26 Now, the same children and young persons were shifted from
the spinning-room to the weaving-room, now, during 15 hours, from one
factory to another. 27 How was it possible to control a system which,

'under the guise of relays, is some one of the many plans for shuffling
'the hands' about in endless variety, and shifting the hours of work
and of rest for different individuals throughout the day, so that you
may never have one complete set of hands working together in the same
room at the same time.'28

But altogether independently of actual over-work, this so-called relay
system was an offspring of capitalistic fantasy, such as Fourier, in
his humorous sketches of 'Courses Seances,' has never surpassed, except
that the 'attraction of labour' was changed into the attraction of
capital. Look, for example, at those schemes of the masters which the
'respectable' press praised as models of 'what a reasonable degree of
care and method can accomplish.' The "personnel" of the workpeople was
sometimes divided into from 12 to 14 categories, which themselves
constantly changed and recharged their constituent parts. During the 15
hours of the factory day, capital dragged in the labourer now for 30
minutes, now for an hour, and then pushed him out again, to drag him
into the factory and to thrust him out afresh, hounding him hither and
thither, in scattered shreds of time, without ever losing hold of him
until the full 10 hours' work was done. As on the stage, the same
persons had to appear in turns in the different scenes of the different
acts. But as an actor during the whole course of the play belongs to
the stage, so the operatives, during 15 hours, belonged to the factory,
without reckoning the time for going and coming. Thus the hours of rest
were turned into hours of enforced idleness, which drove the youths to
the pot-house, and the girls to the brothel. At every new trick that
the capitalist, from day to day, hit upon for keeping his machinery
going 12 or 15 hours without increasing the number of his hands, the
worker had to swallow his meals now in this fragment of time, now in
that. At the time of the 10 hours' agitation, the masters cried out
that the working mob petitioned in the hope of obtaining 12 hours'
wages for 10 hours' work. Now they reversed the medal. They paid 10
hours' wages for 12 or 15 hours' lordship over labour-power.29 This was
the gist of the matter, this the masters' interpretation of the 10
hours' law! These were the same unctuous Free-traders, perspiring with
the love of humanity, who for full 10 years, during the Anti-Corn Law
agitation, had preached to the operatives, by a reckoning of pounds,
shillings, and pence, that with free importation of corn, and with the
means possessed by English industry, 10 hours' labour would be quite
enough to enrich the capitalists.30 This revolt of capital, after two
years was at last crowned with victory by a decision of one of the four
highest Courts of Justice in England, the Court of Exchequer, which in
a case brought before it on February 8th, 1850, decided that the
manufacturers were certainly acting against the sense of the Act of
1844, but that this Act itself contained certain words that rendered it
meaningless. 'By this decision, the Ten Hours' Act was abolished.'31 A
crowd of masters, who until then had been afraid of using the relay
system for young persons and women, now took it up heart and soul.32


But on this apparently decisive victory of capital, followed at once a
revulsion. The workpeople had hitherto offered a passive, although
inflexible and unremitting resistance. They now protested in Lancashire
and Yorkshire in threatening meetings. The pretended Ten Hours' Act was
thus simple humbug, parliamentary cheating, had never existed! The
Factory Inspectors urgently warned the Government that the antagonism
of classes had arrived at an incredible tension. Some of the masters
themselves murmured:

'On account of the contradictory decisions of the magistrates, a
condition of things altogether abnormal and anarchical obtains. One law
holds in Yorkshire, another in Lancashire, one law in one parish of
Lancashire, another in its immediate neighbourhood. The manufacturer in
large towns could evade the law, the manufacturer in country districts
could not find the people necessary for the relay system, still less
for the shifting of hands from one factory to another,' &c.

And the first birthright of capital is equal exploitation of
labour-power by all capitalists.

Under these circumstances a compromise between masters and men was
effected that received the seal of Parliament in the additional Factory
Act of August 5th, 1850. The working day for 'young persons and women,'
was raised from 10 to 10 -- hours for the first five days of the week,
and shortened to 7 1/2 on the Saturday. The work was to go on between 6
a.m. and 6 p.m.33 , with pauses of not less than 1 1/2 hours for
meal-times, these meal-times to be allowed at one and the same time for
all, and conformably to the conditions of 1844. By this an end was put
to the relay system once for all.34 For children's labour, the Act of
1844 remained in force.

One set of masters, this time as before, secured to itself special
seigneurial rights over the children of the proletariat. These were the
silk manufacturers. In 1833 they had howled out in threatening fashion,
'if the liberty of working children of any age for 10 hours a day were
taken away, it would stop their works.'35 It would be impossible for
them to buy a sufficient number of children over 13. They extorted the
privilege they desired. The pretext was shown on subsequent
investigation to be a deliberate lie.36 It did not, however, prevent
them, during 10 years, from spinning silk 10 hours a day out of the
blood of little children who had to be placed upon stools for the
performance of their work.37 The Act of 1844 certainly 'robbed' them of
the 'liberty' of employing children under 11 longer than 6 1/2 hours a
day. But it secured to them, on the other hand, the privilege of
working children between 11 and 13, 10 hours a day, and of annulling in
their case the education made compulsory for all other factory
children. This time the pretext was

'the delicate texture of the fabric in which they were employed,
requiring a lightness of touch, only to be acquired by their early
introduction to these factories.' 38


The children were slaughtered out-and-out for the sake of their
delicate fingers, as in Southern Russia the horned cattle for the sake
of their hide and tallow. At length, in 1850, the privilege granted in
1844, was limited to the departments of silk-twisting and silk-winding.
But here, to make amends to capital bereft of its 'freedom,' the
work-lime for children from 11 to 13 was raised from 10 to 10 1/2 hours.
Pretext: 'Labour in silk mills was lighter than in mills for other
fabrics, and less likely in other respects also to be prejudicial to
health.'39 Official medical inquiries proved afterwards that, on the
contrary,

'the average death-rate is exceedingly high in the silk districts and
amongst the female part of the population is higher even than it is in
the cotton districts of Lancashire.'40

Despite the protests of the Factory Inspector, renewed every 6 months,
the mischief continues to this hour. 41


The Act of 1850 changed the 15 hours' time from 6 a.m. to 8.30 p.m.,
into the 12 hours from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. for 'young persons and women'
only. It did not, therefore, affect children who could always be
employed for half an hour before and 2 1/2 hours after this period,
provided the whole of their labour did not exceed 6 1/2 hours. Whilst
the bill was under discussion, the Factory Inspectors laid before
Parliament statistics of the infamous abuses due to this anomaly. To no
purpose. In the background lurked the intention of screwing up, during
prosperous years, the working day of adult males to 15 hours by the aid
of the children. The experience of the three following years showed
that such an attempt must come to grief against the resistance of the
adult male operatives. The Act of 1850 was therefore finally completed
in 1853 by forbidding the 'employment of children in the morning before
and in the evening after young persons and women.' Henceforth with a
few exceptions the Factory Act of 1850 regulated the working day of all
workers in the branches of industry that come under it.42 Since the
passing of the first Factory Act half a century had elapsed.43

Factory legislation for the first time went beyond its original sphere
in the 'Printworks' Act of 1845.' The displeasure with which capital
received this new 'extravagance' speaks through every line of the Act.
It limits the working day for children from 8 to 13, and for women to
16 hours, between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m., without any legal pause for
meal-times. It allows males over 13 to be worked at will day and
night.44 It is a Parliamentary abortion.45

However, the principle had triumphed with its victory in those great
branches of industry which form the most characteristic creation of the
modern mode of production. Their wonderful development from 1853 to
1860, hand-in-hand with the physical and moral regeneration of the
factory workers, struck the most purblind. The masters from whom the
legal limitation and regulation had been wrung step by step after a
civil war of half a century, themselves referred ostentatiously to the
contrast with the branches of exploitation still 'free.' 46 The
Pharisees of 'Political Economy' now proclaimed the discernment of the
necessity of a legally fixed working day as a characteristic new
discovery of their 'science.'47 It will be easily understood that after
the factory magnates had resigned themselves and become reconciled to
the inevitable, the power of resistance of capital gradually weakened,
whilst at the same time the power of attack of the working-class grew
with the number of its allies in the classes of society not immediately
interested in the question. Hence the comparatively rapid advance since
1860.

The dye-works and bleach-works all came under the Factory Act of 1850
in 1860;48 lace and stocking manufactures in 1861.

In consequence of the first report of the Commission on the employment
of children (1863) the same fate was shared by the manufacturers of all
earthenwares (not merely pottery), Lucifer-matches, percussion caps,
cartridges, carpets, fustian-cutting, and many processes included under
the name of 'finishing.' In the year 1863 bleaching in the open air49
and baking were placed under special Acts, by which, in the former, the
labour of young persons and women during the night-time (from 8 in the
evening to 6 in the morning), and in the latter, the employment of
journeymen bakers under 18, between 9 in the evening and 5 in the
morning were forbidden. We shall return to the later proposals of the
same Commission, which threatened to deprive of their 'freedom' all the
important branches of English Industry, with the exception of
agriculture, mines, and the means of transport.50

=== Section 7: The Struggle for a Normal Working Day. Reaction of the
English Factory Acts on Other Countries == =

The reader will bear in mind that the production of surplus value, or
the extraction of surplus labour, is the specific end and aim, the sum
and substance, of capitalist production, quite apart from any changes
in the mode of production, which may arise from the subordination of
labour to capital. He will remember that as far as we have at present
gone only the independent labourer, and therefore only the labourer
legally qualified to act for himself, enters as a vendor of a commodity
into a contract with the capitalist. If, therefore, in our historical
sketch, on the one hand, modern industry, on the other, the labour of
those who are physically and legally minors, play important parts, the
former was to us only a special department, and the latter only a
specially striking example of labour exploitation. Without, however,
anticipating the subsequent development of our inquiry, from the mere
connexion of the historic facts before us it follows:

"First". The passion of capital for an unlimited and reckless extension
of the working day, is first gratified in the industries earliest
revolutionised by water-power, steam, and machinery, in those first
creations of the modern mode of production, cotton, wool, flax, and
silk spinning, and weaving. The changes in the material mode of
production, and the corresponding changes in the social relations of
the producers51 gave rise first to an extravagance beyond all bounds,
and then in opposition to this, called forth a control on the part of
Society which legally limits, regulates, and makes uniform the working
day and its pauses. This control appears, therefore, during the first
half of the nineteenth century simply as exceptional legislation.52 As
soon as this primitive dominion of the new mode of production was
conquered, it was found that, in the meantime, not only had many other
branches of production been made to adopt the same factory system, but
that manufactures with more or less obsolete methods, such as
potteries, glass-making, &c., that old-fashioned handicrafts, like
baking, and, finally, even that the so-called domestic industries, such
as nail-making,53 had long since fallen as completely under capitalist
exploitation as the factories themselves. Legislation was, therefore,
compelled to gradually get rid of its exceptional character, or where,
as in England, it proceeds after the manner of the Roman Casuists, to
declare any house in which work was done to be a factory.54

"Second". The history of the regulation of the working day in certain
branches of production, and the struggle still going on in others in
regard to this regulation, prove conclusively that the isolated
labourer, the labourer as 'free' vendor of his labour-power, when
capitalist production has once attained a certain stage, succumbs
without any power of resistance. The creation of a normal working day
is, therefore, the product of a protracted civil war, more or less
dissembled, between the capitalist class and the working-class. As the
contest takes place in the arena of modern industry, it first breaks
out in the home of that industry -- England.55 The English factory
workers were the champions, not only of the English, but of the modern
working-class generally, as their theorists were the first to throw
down the gauntlet to the theory of capital.56 Hence, the philosopher of
the Factory, Ure, denounces as an ineffable disgrace to the English
working-class that they inscribed 'the slavery of the Factory Acts' on
the banner which they bore against capital, manfully striving for
'perfect freedom of labour.'57

France limps slowly behind England. The February revolution was
necessary to bring into the world the 12 hours' law,58 which is much
more deficient than its English original. For all that, the French
revolutionary method has its special advantages. It once for all
commands the same limit to the working day in all shops and factories
without distinction, whilst English legislation reluctantly yields to
the pressure of circumstances, now on this point, now on that, and is
getting lost in a hopelessly bewildering tangle of contradictory
enactments.59 On the other hand, the French law proclaims as a
principle that which in England was only won in the name of children,
minors, and women, and has been only recently for the first time
claimed as a general right.60

In the United States of North America, every independent movement of
the workers was paralysed so long as slavery disfigured a part of the
Republic. Labour cannot emancipate itself in the white skin where in
the black it is branded. But out of the death of slavery a new life at
once arose. The first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours'
agitation, that ran with the seven-leagued boots of the locomotive from
the Atlantic to the Pacific, from New England to California. The
General Congress of labour at Baltimore (August 16th, 1866) declared:

'The first and great necessity of the present, to free the labour of
this country from capitalistic slavery, is the passing of a law by
which eight hours shall be the normal working day in all States of the
American Union. We are resolved to put forth all our strength until
this glorious result is attained.'61

At the same time, the Congress of the International Working Men's
Association at Geneva, on the proposition of the London General
Council, resolved that 'the limitation of the working day is a
preliminary condition without which all further attempts at improvement
and emancipation must prove abortive... the Congress proposes eight
hours as the legal limit of the working day.'

Thus the movement of the working-class on both sides of the Atlantic,
that had grown instinctively out of the conditions of production
themselves, endorsed the words of the English Factory Inspector, R. J.
Saunders

'Further steps towards a reformation of society can never be carried
out with any hope of success, unless the hours of labour be limited,
and the prescribed limit strictly enforced.'62

It must be acknowledged that our labourer comes out of the process of
production other than he entered. In the market he stood as owner of
the commodity 'labour-power' face to face with other owners of
commodities, dealer against dealer. The contract by which he sold to
the capitalist his labour-power proved, so to say, in black and white
that he disposed of himself freely. The bargain concluded, it is
discovered that he was no 'free agent,' that the time for which he is
free to sell his labour-power is the time for which he is forced to
sell it,63 that in fact the vampire will not lose its hold on him 'so
long as there is a muscle, a nerve, a drop of blood to be exploited.'64
For 'protection' against 'the serpent of their agonies,' the labourers
must put their heads together, and, as a class, compel the passing of a
law, an all-powerful social barrier that shall prevent the very workers
from selling. by voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their
families into slavery and death.65 In place of the pompous catalogue of
the 'inalienable rights of man' comes the modest Magna Charta of a
legally limited working day, which shall make clear 'when the time
which the worker sells is ended, and when his own begins.' Quantum
mutatus ab illo!


66


== Chapter 11: Rate and Mass of Surplus Value = =

In this chapter, as hitherto, the value of labour-power, and therefore
the part of the working day necessary for the reproduction or
maintenance of that labour-power, are supposed to be given, constant
magnitudes.

This premised, with the rate, the mass is at the same time given of the
surplus value that the individual labourer furnishes to the capitalist
in a definite period of time. If, "e.g.", the necessary labour amounts
to 6 hours daily, expressed in a quantum of gold = 3 shillings, then
3s. is the daily value of one labour-power or the value of the capital
advanced in the buying of one labour-power. If, further, the rate of
surplus value be = 100%, this variable capital of 3s. produces a mass
of surplus value of 3s., or the labourer supplies daily a mass of
surplus labour equal to 6 hours.

But the variable capital of a capitalist is the expression in money of
the total value of all the labour-powers that he employs
simultaneously. Its value is, therefore, equal to the average value of
one labour-power, multiplied by the number of labour-powers employed.
With a given value of labour-power, therefore, the magnitude of the
variable capital varies directly as the number of labourers employed
simultaneously. If the daily value of one labour-power = 3s., then a
capital of 300s. must be advanced in order to exploit daily 100
labour-powers, of n times 3s., in order to exploit daily n
labour-powers.

In the same way, if a variable capital of 3s., being the daily value of
one labour-power, produce a daily surplus value of 3s., a variable
capital of 300s. will produce a daily surplus value of 300s., and one
of n times 3s. a daily surplus value of n √ó 3s. The mass of the
surplus value produced is therefore equal to the surplus value which
the working day of one labourer supplies multiplied by the number of
labourers employed. But as further the mass of surplus value which a
single labourer produces, the value of labour-power being given, is
determined by the rate of the surplus value, this law follows: the mass
of the surplus value produced is equal to the amount of the variable
capital advanced, multiplied by the rate of surplus value, in other
words: it is determined by the compound ratio between the number of
labour-powers exploited simultaneously by the same capitalist and the
degree of exploitation of each individual labour-power.

Let the mass of the surplus value be S, the surplus value supplied by
the individual labourer in the average day s the variable capital daily
advanced in the purchase of one individual labour-power v, the sum
total of the variable capital V, the value of an average labour-power
P, its degree of exploitation (a'/a) (surplus labour/necessary-labour)
and the number of labourers employed n; we have:





| style="border:none;padding:0.026cm;"|



|} It is always supposed, not only that the value of an average
labour-power is constant, but that the labourers employed by a
capitalist are reduced to average labourers. There are exceptional
cases in which the surplus value produced does not increase in
proportion to the number of labourers exploited, but then the value of
the labour-power does not remain constant.

In the production of a definite mass of surplus value, therefore the
decrease of one factor may be compensated by the increase of the other.
If the variable capital diminishes, and at the same time the rate of
surplus value increases in the same ratio, the mass of surplus value
produced remains unaltered. If on our earlier assumption the capitalist
must advance 300s., in order to exploit 100 labourers a day, and if the
rate of surplus value amounts to 50%, this variable capital of 300s.
yields a surplus value of 150s. or of 100 √ó 3 working hours. If the
rate of surplus value doubles, or the working day, instead of being
extended from 6 to 9, is extended from 6 to 12 hours and at the same
time variable capital is lessened by half, and reduced to 150s., it
yields also a surplus value of 150s. or 50 √ó 6 working hours.
Diminution of the variable capital may therefore be compensated by a
proportionate rise in the degree of exploitation of labour-power, or
the decrease in the number of the labourers employed by a proportionate
extension of the working day. Within certain limits therefore the
supply of labour exploitable by capital is independent of the supply of
labourers. On the contrary, a fall in the rate of surplus value leaves
unaltered the mass of the surplus value produced, if the amount of the
variable capital, or number of the labourers employed, increases in the
same proportion.

Nevertheless, the compensation of a decrease in the number of labourers
employed, or of the amount of variable capital advanced by a rise in
the rate of surplus value, or by the lengthening of the working day,
has impassable limits. Whatever the value of labour-power may be,
whether the working time necessary for the maintenance of the labourer
is 2 or 10 hours, the total value that a labourer can produce, day in,
day out, is always less than the value in which 24 hours of labour are
embodied, less than 12s., if 12s. is the money expression for 24 hours
of realised labour. In our former assumption, according to which 6
working hours are daily necessary in order to reproduce the
labour-power itself or to replace the value of the capital advanced in
its purchase, a variable capital of 1,500s., that employs 500 labourers
at a rate of surplus value of 100% with a 12 hours' working day,
produces daily a surplus value of 1,500s. or of 6 √ó 500 working hours.
A capital of 300s. that employs 100 labourers a day with a rate of
surplus value of 200% or with a working day of 18 hours, produces
only a mass of surplus value of 600s. or 12 √ó 100 working hours; and
its total value-product, the equivalent of the variable capital
advanced plus the surplus value, can, day in, day out, never reach the
sum of 1,200s. or 24 √ó 100 working hours. The absolute limit of the
average working day -- this being by nature always less than 24 hours
-- sets an absolute limit to the compensation of a reduction of
variable capital by a higher rate of surplus value, or of the decrease
of the number of labourers exploited by a higher degree of exploitation
of labour-power. This palpable law is of importance for the clearing up
of many phenomena, arising from a tendency (to be worked out later on)
of capital to reduce as much as possible the number of labourers
employed by it, or its variable constituent transformed into
labour-power, in contradiction to its other tendency to produce the
greatest possible mass of surplus value. On the other hand, if the mass
of labour-power employed, or the amount of variable capital, increases,
but not in proportion to the fall in the rate of surplus value, the
mass of the surplus value produced, falls.

A third law results from the determination, of the mass of the surplus
value produced, by the two factors: rate of surplus value and amount of
variable capital advanced. The rate of surplus value, or the degree of
exploitation of labour-power, and the value of labour-power, or the
amount of necessary working time being given, it is self evident that
the greater the variable capital, the greater would be the mass of the
value produced and of the surplus value. If the limit of the working
day is given, and also the limit of its necessary constituent, the mass
of value and surplus value that an individual capitalist produces, is
clearly exclusively dependent on the mass of labour that he sets in
motion. But this, under the conditions supposed above, depends on the
mass of labour-power, or the number of labourers whom he exploits, and
this number in its turn is determined by the amount of the variable
capital advanced. With a given rate of surplus value, and a given value
of labour-power, therefore, the masses of surplus value produced vary
directly as the amounts of the variable capitals advanced. Now we know
that the capitalist divides his capital into two parts. One part he
lays out in means of production. This is the constant part of his
capital. The other part he lays out in living labour-power. This part
forms his variable capital. On the basis of the same mode of social
production, the division of capital into constant and variable differs
in different branches of production, and within the same branch of
production, too, this relation changes with changes in the technical
conditions and in the social combinations of the processes of
production. But in whatever proportion a given capital breaks up into a
constant and a variable part, whether the latter is to the former as
1:2 or 1:10 or 1:x, the law just laid down is not affected by this.
For, according to our previous analysis, the value of the constant
capital reappears in the value of the product, but does not enter into
the newly produced value, the newly created value product. To employ
1,000 spinners, more raw material, spindles, &c., are, of course,
required, than to employ 100. The value of these additional means of
production however may rise, fall, remain unaltered, be large or small;
it has no influence on the process of creation of surplus value by
means of the labour-powers that put them in motion. The law
demonstrated above now, therefore, takes this form: the masses of value
and of surplus value produced by different capitals -- the value of
labour-power being given and its degree of exploitation being equal --
vary directly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these
capitals, "i.e.", as their constituents transformed into living
labour-power.

This law clearly contradicts all experience based on appearance.
Everyone knows that a cotton spinner, who, reckoning the percentage on
the whole of his applied capital, employs much constant and little
variable capital, does not, on account of this, pocket less profit or
surplus value than a baker, who relatively sets in motion much variable
and little constant capital. For the solution of this apparent
contradiction, many intermediate terms are as yet wanted, as from the
standpoint of elementary algebra many intermediate terms are wanted to
understand that 0/0 may represent an actual magnitude. Classical
economy, although not formulating the law, holds instinctively to it,
because it is a necessary consequence of the general law of value. It
tries to rescue the law from collision with contradictory phenomena by
a violent abstraction. It will be seen later how the school of Ricardo
has come to grief over this stumbling block. Vulgar economy which,
indeed, 'has really learnt nothing,' here as everywhere sticks to
appearances in opposition to the law which regulates and explains them.
In opposition to Spinoza, it believes that 'ignorance is a sufficient
reason.'

The labour which is set in motion by the total capital of a society,
day in, day out, may be regarded as a single collective working day.
If, "e.g.", the number of labourers is a million, and the average
working day of a labourer is 10 hours, the social working day consists
of ten million hours. With a given length of this working day, whether
its limits are fixed physically or socially, the mass of surplus value
can only be increased by increasing the number of labourers, "i.e.", of
the labouring population. The growth of population here forms the
mathematical limit to the production of surplus value by the total
social capital. On the contrary, with a given amount of population,
this limit is formed by the possible lengthening of the workingday. It
will, however, be seen in the following chapter that this law only
holds for the form of surplus value dealt with up to the present.

From the treatment of the production of surplus value, so far, it
follows that not every sum of money, or of value, is at pleasure
transformable into capital. To effect this transformation, in fact, a
certain minimum of money or of exchange-value must be presupposed in
the hands of the individual possessor of money or commodities. The
minimum of variable capital is the cost price of a single labour-power,
employed the whole year through, day in, day out, for the production of
surplus value. If this labourer were in possession of his own means of
production, and were satisfied to live as a labourer, he need not work
beyond the time necessary for the reproduction of his means of
subsistence, say 8 hours a day. He would, besides, only require the
means of production sufficient for 8 working hours. The capitalist, on
the other hand, who makes him do, besides these 8 hours, say 4 hours'
surplus labour, requires an additional sum of money for furnishing the
additional means of production. On our supposition, however, he would
have to employ two labourers in order to live, on the surplus value
appropriated daily, as well as, and no better than a labourer, i.e., to
be able to satisfy his necessary wants. In this case the mere
maintenance of life would be the end of his production, not the
increase of wealth; but this latter is implied in capitalist
production. That he may live only twice as well as an ordinary
labourer, and besides turn half of the surplus value produced into
capital, he would have to raise, with the number of labourers, the
minimum of the capital advanced 8 times. Of course he can, like his
labourer, take to work himself, participate directly in the process of
production, but he is then only a hybrid between capitalist and
labourer, a 'small master.' A certain stage of capitalist production
necessitates that the capitalist be able to devote the whole of the
time during which he functions as a capitalist, "i.e.", as personified
capital, to the appropriation and therefore control of the labour of
others, and to the selling of the products of this labour. The guilds
of the middle ages therefore tried to prevent by force the
transformation of the master of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting
the number of labourers that could be employed by one master within a
very small maximum. The possessor of money or commodities actually
turns into a capitalist in such cases only where the minimum sum
advanced for production greatly exceeds the maximum of the middle ages.
Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law
discovered by Hegel (in his 'Logic'), that merely quantitative
differences beyond a certain point pass into qualitative changes.

The minimum of the sum of value that the individual possessor of money
or commodities must command, in order to metamorphose himself into a
capitalist, changes with the different stages of development of
capitalist production, and is at given stages different in different
spheres of production, according to their special and technical
conditions. Certain spheres of production demand, even at the very
outset of capitalist production, a minimum of capital that is not as
yet found in the hands of single individuals. This gives rise partly to
state subsidies to private persons, as in France in the time of
Clobber, and as in many German states up to our own epoch, partly to
the formation of societies with legal monopoly for the exploitation of
certain branches of industry and commerce, the forerunners of our
modern joint stock companies.

Within the process of production, as we have seen, capital acquired the
command over labour, "i.e.", over functioning labour-power or the
labourer himself. Personified capital, the capitalist takes care that
the labourer does his work regularly and with the proper degree of
intensity.

Capital further developed into a coercive relation, which compels the
working class to do more work than the narrow round of its own
life-wants prescribes. As a producer of the activity of others, as a
pumper-out of surplus labour and exploiter of labour-power, it
surpasses in energy, disregard of bounds, recklessness and efficiency,
all earlier systems of production based on directly compulsory labour.

At first, capital subordinates labour on the basis of the technical
conditions in which it historically finds it. It does not, therefore,
change immediately the mode of production. The production of surplus
value -- in the form hitherto considered by us -- by means of simple
extension of the working day, proved, therefore, to be independent of
any change in the mode of production itself. It was not less active in
the old-fashioned bakeries than in the modern cotton factories.

If we consider the process of production from the point of view of the
simple labour process, the labourer stands in relation to the means of
production, not in their quality as capital, but as the mere means and
material of his own intelligent productive activity. In tanning,
"e.g.", he deals with the skins as his simple object of labour. It is
not the capitalist whose skin he tans. But it is different as soon as
we deal with the process of production from the point of view of the
process of creation of surplus value. The means of production are at
once changed into means for the absorption of the labour of others. It
is now no longer the labourer that employs the means of production, but
the means of production that employ the labourer. Instead of being
consumed by him as material elements of his productive activity, they
consume him as the ferment necessary to their own life-process, and the
life-process of capital consists only in its movement as value
constantly expanding, constantly multiplying itself. Furnaces and
workshops that stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour, are 'a
mere loss' to the capitalist. Hence, furnaces and workshops constitute
lawful claims upon the night-labour of the work-people. The simple
transformation of money into the material factors of the process of
production, into means of production, transforms the latter into a
title and a right to the labour and surplus labour of others. An
example will show, in conclusion, how this sophistication, peculiar to
and characteristic of capitalist production, this complete inversion of
the relation between dead and living labour, between value and the
force that creates value, mirrors itself in the consciousness of
capitalists. During the revolt of the English factory lords between
1848 and 1850, 'the head of one of the oldest and most respectable
houses in the West of Scotland, Messrs. Carlile Sons & Co., of the
linen and cotton thread factory at Paisley, a company which has now
existed for about a century, which was in operation in 1752, and four
generations of the same family have conducted it' ... this 'very
intelligent gentleman' then wrote a letter in the "Glasgow Daily Mail"
of April 25th, 1849, with the title, 'The relay system,' in which among
other things the following grotesquely na√Øve passage occurs: 'Let us
now ... see what evils will attend the limiting to 10 hours the working
of the factory.... They amount to the most serious damage to the
millowner's prospects and property. If he (i.e., his 'hands') worked 12
hours before, and is limited to 10, then every 12 machines or spindles
in his establishment shrink to 10, and should the works be disposed of,
they will be valued only as 10, so that a sixth part would thus be
deducted from the value of every factory in the country.'

To this West of Scotland bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated
capitalistic qualities of 'four generations.' the value of the means of
production, spindles, &c., is so inseparably mixed up with their
property, as capital, to expand their own value, and to swallow up
daily a definite quantity of the unpaid labour of others, that the head
of the firm of Carlile & Co. actually imagines that if he sells his
factory, not only will the value of the spindles be paid to him, but,
in addition, their power of annexing surplus value, not only the labour
which is embodied in them, and is necessary to the production of
spindles of this kind, but also the surplus labour which they help to
pump out daily from the brave Scots of Paisley, and for that very
reason he thinks that with the shortening of the working day by 2
hours, the selling-price of 12 spinning machines dwindles to that of
10!

= Part 4: Production of Relative Surplus Value =

== Chapter 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus Value = =

That portion of the working day which merely produces an equivalent for
the value paid by the capitalist for his labour-power, has, up to this
point, been treated by us as a constant magnitude, and such in fact it
is, under given conditions of production and at a given stage in the
economic development of society. Beyond this, his necessary
labour-time, the labourer, we saw, could continue to work for 2, 3, 4,
6, &c., hours. The rate of surplus value and the length of the working
day depended on the magnitude of this prolongation. Though the
necessary labour-time was constant, we saw, on the other hand, that the
total working day was variable. Now suppose we have a working day whose
length, and whose apportionment between necessary labour and surplus
labour, are given. Let the whole line a c, a--b--c represent, for
example, a working day of 12 hours; the portion of a b 10 hours of
necessary labour, and the portion b c 2 hours of surplus labour. How
now can the production of surplus value be increased, i.e., how can the
surplus labour be prolonged, without, or independently of, any
prolongation of a c?

Although the length of a c is given, b c appears to be capable of
prolongation, if not by extension beyond its end c, which is also the
end of the working day a c, yet, at all events, by pushing back its
starting-point b in the direction of a. Assume that b'--b in the line
ab'bc is equal to half of b c


a------b'--b----c


or to one hour's labour-time. If now, in a c, the working day of 12
hours, we move the point b to b', b c becomes b' c; the surplus labour
increases by one half, from 2 hours to 3 hours, although the working
day remains as before at 12 hours. This extension of the surplus
labour-time from b c to b' c, from 2 hours to 3 hours, is, however,
evidently impossible, without a simultaneous contraction of the
necessary labour-time from a b into a b', from 10 hours to 9 hours. The
prolongation of the surplus labour would correspond to a shortening of
the necessary labour; or a portion of the labour-time previously
consumed, in reality, for the labourer's own benefit, would be
converted into labour-time for the benefit of the capitalist. There
would be an alteration, not in the length of the working day, but in
its division into necessary labour-time and surplus labour-time.

On the other hand, it is evident that the duration of the surplus
labour is given, when the length of the working day, and the value of
labour-power, are given. The value of labour-power, i.e., the
labour-time requisite to produce labour-power, determines the
labour-time necessary for the reproduction of that value. If one
working-hour be embodied in sixpence, and the value of a day's
labour-power be five shillings, the labourer must work 10 hours a day,
in order to replace the value paid by capital for his labour-power, or
to produce an equivalent for the value of his daily necessary means of
subsistence. Given the value of these means of subsistence, the value
of his labour-power is given; and given the value of his labour-power,
the duration of his necessary labour-time is given. The duration of the
surplus labour, however, is arrived at, by subtracting the necessary
labour-time from the total working day. Ten hours subtracted from
twelve, leave two, and it is not easy to see, how, under the given
conditions, the surplus labour can possibly be prolonged beyond two
hours. No doubt, the capitalist can, instead of five shillings, pay the
labourer four shillings and sixpence or even less. For the reproduction
of this value of four shillings and sixpence, nine hours' labour-time
would suffice; and consequently three hours of surplus labour, instead
of two, would accrue to the capitalist, and the surplus value would
rise from one shilling to eighteen-pence. This result, however, would
be obtained only by lowering the wages of the labourer below the value
of his labour-power. With the four shillings and sixpence which he
produces in nine hours, he commands one-tenth less of the necessaries
of life than before, and consequently the proper reproduction of his
labour-power is crippled. The surplus labour would in this case be
prolonged only by an overstepping of its normal limits; its domain
would be extended only by a usurpation of part of the domain of
necessary labour-time. Despite the important part which this method
plays in actual practice, we are excluded from considering it in this
place, by our assumption, that all commodities, including labour-power,
are bought and sold at their full value. Granted this, it follows that
the labour-time necessary for the production of labour-power, or for
the reproduction of its value, cannot be lessened by a fall in the
labourer's wages below the value of his labour-power, but only by a
fall in this value itself. Given the length of the working day, the
prolongation of the surplus labour must of necessity originate in the
curtailment of the necessary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from
the former. In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the
value of labour-power should actually fall by one-tenth, in order that
the necessary labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from
ten hours to nine, and in order that the surplus labour may
consequently be prolonged from two hours to three.

Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the
same necessaries of life which were formerly produced in ten hours, can
now be produced in nine hours. But this is impossible without an
increase in the productiveness of labour. For example, suppose a
shoe-maker, with given tools, makes in one working day of twelve hours,
one pair of boots. If he must make two pairs in the same time, the
productiveness of his labour must be doubled; and this cannot be done,
except by an alteration in his tools or in his mode of working, or in
both. Hence, the conditions of production, i.e., his mode of
production, and the labour-process itself, must be revolutionised. By
increase in the productiveness of labour, we mean, generally, an
alteration in the labour-process, of such a kind as to shorten the
labour-time socially necessary for the production of a commodity, and
to endow a given quantity of labour with the power of producing a
greater quantity of use-value. Hitherto in treating of surplus value,
arising from a simple prolongation of the working day, we have assumed
the mode of production to be given and invariable. But when surplus
value has to be produced by the conversion of necessary labour into
surplus labour, it by no means suffices for capital to take over the
labour-process in the form under which it has been historically handed
down, and then simply to prolong the duration of that process. The
technical and social conditions of the process, and consequently the
very mode of production must be revolutionised, before the
productiveness of labour can be increased. By that means alone can the
value of labour-power be made to sink, and the portion of the working
day necessary for the reproduction of that value, be shortened.

The surplus value produced by prolongation of the working day, I call
"absolute surplus value". On the other hand, the surplus value arising
from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and from the
corresponding alteration in the respective lengths of the two
components of the working day, I call "relative surplus value".

In order to effect a fall in the value of labour-power, the increase in
the productiveness of labour must seize upon those branches of industry
whose products determine the value of labour-power, and consequently
either belong to the class of customary means of subsistence, or are
capable of supplying the place of those means. But the value of a
commodity is determined, not only by the quantity of labour which the
labourer directly bestows upon that commodity, but also by the labour
contained in the means of production. For instance, the value of a pair
of boots depends not only on the cobbler's labour, but also on the
value of the leather, wax, thread, &c. Hence, a fall in the value of
labour-power is also brought about by an increase in the productiveness
of labour, and by a corresponding cheapening of commodities in those
industries which supply the instruments of labour and the raw material,
that form the material elements of the constant capital required for
producing the necessaries of life. But an increase in the
productiveness of labour in those branches of industry which supply
neither the necessaries of life, nor the means of production for such
necessaries, leaves the value of labour-power undisturbed.

The cheapened commodity, of course, causes only a pro tanto fall in the
value of labour-power, a fall proportional to the extent of that
commodity's employment in the reproduction of labour-power. Shirts, for
instance, are a necessary means of subsistence, but are only one out of
many. The totality of the necessaries of life consists, however, of
various commodities, each the product of a distinct industry; and the
value of each of those commodities enters as a component part into the
value of labour-power. This latter value decreases with the decrease of
the labour-time necessary for its reproduction; the total decrease
being the sum of all the different curtailments of labour-time effected
in those various and distinct industries. This general result is
treated, here, as if it were the immediate result directly aimed at in
each individual case. Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens
shirts, for instance, by increasing the productiveness of labour he by
no means necessarily aims at reducing the value of labour-power and
shortening, pro tanto the necessary labour-time. But it is only in so
far as he ultimately contributes to this result, that he assists in
raising the general rate of surplus value. The general and necessary
tendencies of capital must be distinguished from their forms of
manifestation.

It is not our intention to consider, here, the way in which the laws,
immanent in capitalist production, manifest themselves in the movements
of individual masses of capital, where they assert themselves as
coercive laws of competition, and are brought home to the mind and
consciousness of the individual capitalist as the directing motives of
his operations. But this much is clear; a scientific analysis of
competition is not possible, before we have a conception of the inner
nature of capital, just as the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies
are not intelligible to any but him, who is acquainted with their real
motions, motions which are not directly perceptible by the senses.
Nevertheless, for the better comprehension of the production of
relative surplus value, we may add the following remarks, in which we
assume nothing more than the results we have already obtained.

If one hour's labour is embodied in sixpence, a value of six shillings
will be produced in a working day of 12 hours. Suppose, that with the
prevailing productiveness of labour, 12 articles are produced in these
12 hours. Let the value of the means of production used up in each
article be sixpence. Under these circumstances, each article costs one
shilling: sixpence for the value of the means of production, and
sixpence for the value newly added in working with those means. Now let
some one capitalist contrive to double the productiveness of labour,
and to produce in the working day of 12 hours, 24 instead of 12 such
articles. The value of the means of production remaining the same, the
value of each article will fall to ninepence, made up of sixpence for
the value of the means of production and threepence for the value newly
added by the labour. Despite the doubled productiveness of labour, the
day's labour creates, as before, a new value of six shillings and no
more, which, however, is now spread over twice as many articles. Of
this value each article now has embodied in it  1/24th, instead of
1/12th, threepence instead of sixpence; or, what amounts to the same
thing, only half an hour's instead of a whole hour's labour-time, is
now added to the means of production while they are being transformed
into each article. The individual value of these articles is now below
their social value; in other words, they have cost less labour-time
than the great bulk of the same article produced under the average
social conditions. Each article costs, on an average, one shilling, and
represents 2 hours of social labour; but under the altered mode of
production it costs only ninepence, or contains only 1 1/2 hours'
labour. The real value of a commodity is, however, not its individual
value, but its social value; that is to say, the real value is not
measured by the labour-time that the article in each individual case
costs the producer, but by the labour-time socially required for its
production. If therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method,
sells his commodity at its social value of one shilling, he sells it
for threepence above its individual value, and thus realises an extra
surplus value of threepence. On the other hand, the working day of 12
hours is, as regards him, now represented by 24 articles instead of 12.
Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one working day, the
demand must be double what it was, i.e., the market must become twice
as extensive. Other things being equal, his commodities can command a
more extended market only by a diminution of their prices. He will
therefore sell them above their individual but under their social
value, say at tenpence each. By this means he still squeezes an extra
surplus value of one penny out of each. This augmentation of surplus
value is pocketed by him, whether his commodities belong or not to the
class of necessary means of subsistence that participate in determining
the general value of labour-power. Hence, independently of this latter
circumstance, there is a motive for each individual capitalist to
cheapen his commodities, by increasing the productiveness of labour.

Nevertheless, even in this case, the increased production of surplus
value arises from the curtailment of the necessary labour-time, and
from the corresponding prolongation of the surplus labour. Let the
necessary labour-time amount to 10 hours, the value of a day's
labour-power to five shillings, the surplus labour-time to 2 hours, and
the daily surplus value to one shilling. But the capitalist now
produces 24 articles, which he sells at tenpence a-piece, making twenty
shillings in all. Since the value of the means of production is twelve
shillings, 14 2/5 of these articles merely replace the constant capital
advanced. The labour of the 12 hours' working day is represented by the
remaining 9 3/5 articles. Since the price of the labour-power is five
shillings, 6 articles represent the necessary labour-time, and 3 3/5
articles the surplus labour. The ratio of the necessary labour to the
surplus labour, which under average social conditions was 5:1, is now
only 5:3. The same result may be arrived at in the following way. The
value of the product of the working day of 12 hours is twenty
shillings. Of this sum, twelve shillings belong to the value of the
means of production, a value that merely re-appears. There remain eight
shillings, which are the expression in money, of the value newly
created during the working day. This sum is greater than the sum in
which average social labour of the same kind is expressed: twelve hours
of the latter labour are expressed by six shillings only. The
exceptionally productive labour operates as intensified labour; it
creates in equal periods of time greater values than average social
labour of the same kind. (See Ch. I. Sect 2. p. 44.) But our capitalist
still continues to pay as before only five shillings as the value of a
day's labour-power. Hence, instead of 10 hours, the labourer need now
work only 7 1/2 hours, in order to reproduce this value. His surplus
labour is, therefore, increased by 2 1/2 hours, and the surplus value he
produces grows from one, into three shillings. Hence, the capitalist
who applies the improved method of production, appropriates to surplus
labour a greater portion of the working day, than the other capitalists
in the same trade. He does individually, what the whole body of
capitalists engaged in producing relative surplus value, do
collectively. On the other hand, however, this extra surplus value
vanishes, so soon as the new method of production has become general,
and has consequently caused the difference between the individual value
of the cheapened commodity and its social value to vanish. The law of
the determination of value by labour-time, a law which brings under its
sway the individual capitalist who applies the new method of
production, by compelling him to sell his goods under their social
value, this same law, acting as a coercive law of competition, forces
his competitors to adopt the new method. The general rate of surplus
value is, therefore, ultimately affected by the whole process, only
when the increase in the productiveness of labour, has seized upon
those branches of production that are connected with, and has cheapened
those commodities that form part of, the necessary means of
subsistence, and are therefore elements of the value of labour-power.

The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the productiveness of
labour. And so, too, is the value of labour-power, because it depends
on the values of commodities. Relative surplus value is, on the
contrary, directly proportional to that productiveness. It rises with
rising and falls with falling productiveness. The value of money being
assumed to be constant, an average social working day of 12 hours
always produces the same new value, six shillings, no matter how this
sum may be apportioned between surplus value and wages. But if, in
consequence of increased productiveness, the value of the necessaries
of life fall, and the value of a day's labour-power be thereby reduced
from five shillings to three, the surplus value increases from one
shilling to three. Ten hours were necessary for the reproduction of the
value of the labour-power; now only six are required. Four hours have
been set free, and can be annexed to the domain of surplus labour.
Hence there is immanent in capital an inclination and constant
tendency, to heighten the productiveness of labour, in order to cheapen
commodities, and by such cheapening to cheapen the labourer himself.

The value of a commodity is, in itself, of no interest to the
capitalist. What alone interests him, is the surplus value that dwells
in it, and is realisable by sale. Realisation of the surplus value
necessarily carries with it the refunding of the value that was
advanced. Now, since relative surplus value increases in direct
proportion to the development of the productiveness of labour, while,
on the other hand, the value of commodities diminishes in the same
proportion; since one and the same process cheapens commodities, and
augments the surplus value contained in them; we have here the solution
of the riddle: why does the capitalist, whose sole concern is the
production of exchange-value, continually strive to depress the
exchange-value of commodities? A riddle with which Quesnay, one of the
founders of Political Economy, tormented his opponents, and to which
they could give him no answer.

'You acknowledge,' he says, 'that the more expenses and the cost of
labour can, in the manufacture of industrial products, be reduced
without injury to production, the more advantageous is such reduction,
because it diminishes the price of the finished article. And yet, you
believe that the production of wealth, which arises from the labour of
the workpeople, consists in the augmentation of the exchange-value of
their products.'

The shortening of the working day is, therefore, by no means what is
aimed at, in capitalist production, when labour is economised by
increasing its productiveness. It is only the shortening of the
labour-time, necessary for the production of a definite quantity of
commodities, that is aimed at. The fact that the workman, when the
productiveness of his labour has been increased, produces, say 10 times
as many commodities as before, and thus spends one-tenth as much
labour-time on each, by no means prevents him from continuing to work
12 hours as before, nor from producing in those 12 hours 1,200 articles
instead of 120. Nay, more, his working day may be prolonged at the same
time, so as to make him produce, say 1,400 articles in 14 hours. In the
treatises, therefore, of economists of the stamp of MacCulloch, Ure,
Senior, and "tutti quanti" , we may read upon one page, that the
labourer owes a debt of gratitude to capital for developing his
productiveness, because the necessary labour-time is thereby shortened,
and on the next page, that he must prove his gratitude by working in
future for 15 hours instead of 10. The object of all development of the
productiveness of labour, within the limits of capitalist production,
is to shorten that part of the working day, during which the workman
must labour for his own benefit, and by that very shortening, to
lengthen the other part of the day, during which he is at liberty to
work gratis for the capitalist. How far this result is also attainable,
without cheapening commodities, will appear from an examination of the
particular modes of producing relative surplus value, to which
examination we now proceed.


== Chapter 13: Co-operation = =

Capitalist production only then really begins, as we have already seen,
when each individual capital employs simultaneously a comparatively
large number of labourers; when consequently the labour-process is
carried on on an extensive scale and yields, relatively, large
quantities of products. A greater number of labourers working together,
at the same time, in one place (or, if you will, in the same field of
labour), in order to produce the same sort of commodity under the
mastership of one capitalist, constitutes, both historically and
logically, the starting-point of capitalist production. With regard to
the mode of production itself, manufacture, in its strict meaning, is
hardly to be distinguished, in its earliest stages, from the handicraft
trades of the guilds, otherwise than by the greater number of workmen
simultaneously employed by one and the same individual capital. The
workshop of the medieval master handicraftsman is simply enlarged.

At first, therefore, the difference is purely quantitative. We have
shown that the surplus value produced by a given capital is equal to
the surplus value produced by each workman multiplied by the number of
workmen simultaneously employed. The number of workmen in itself does
nor affect, either the rate of surplus value, or the degree of
exploitation of labour-power. If a working day of 12 hours be embodied
in six shillings, 1,200 such days will be embodied in 1,200 times 6
shillings. In one case 12 √ó 1,200 working-hours, and in the other 12
such hours are incorporated in the product. In the production of value
a number of workmen rank merely as so many individual workmen; and it
therefore makes no difference in the value produced whether the 1,200
men work separately, or united under the control of one capitalist.

Nevertheless, within certain limits, a modification takes place. The
labour realised in value, is labour of an average social quality; is
consequently the expenditure of average labour-power. Any average
magnitude, however, is merely the average of a number of separate
magnitudes all of one kind, but differing as to quantity. In every
industry, each individual labourer, be he Peter or Paul, differs from
the average labourer. These individual differences, or 'errors' as they
are called in mathematics, compensate one another, and vanish, whenever
a certain minimum number of workmen are employed together. The
celebrated sophist and sycophant, Edmund Burke, goes so far as to make
the following assertion, based on his practical observations as a
farmer; viz., that 'in so small a platoon' as that of five farm
labourers, all individual differences in the labour vanish, and that
consequently any given five adult farm labourers taken together, will
in the same time do as much work as any other five. But, however that
may be, it is clear, that the collective working day of a large number
of workmen simultaneously employed, divided by the number of these
workmen, gives one day of average social labour. For example, let the
working day of each individual be 12 hours. Then the collective working
day of 12 men simultaneously employed, consists of 144 hours; and
although the labour of each of the dozen men may deviate more or less
from average social labour, each of them requiring a different time for
the same operation, yet since the working day of each is one-twelfth of
the collective working day of 144 hours, it possesses the qualities of
an average social working day. From the point of view, however, of the
capitalist who employs these 12 men, the working day is that of the
whole dozen. Each individual man's day is an aliquot part of the
collective working day, no matter whether the 12 men assist one another
in their work, or whether the connexion between their operations
consists merely in the fact, that the men are all working for the same
capitalist. But if the 12 men are employed in six pairs, by as many
different small masters, it will be quite a matter of chance, whether
each of these masters produces the same value, and consequently whether
he realises the general rate of surplus value. Deviations would occur
in individual cases. If one workman required considerably more time for
the production of a commodity than is socially necessary, the duration
of the necessary labour-time would, in his case, sensibly deviate from
the labour-time socially necessary on an average; and consequently his
labour would not count as average labour, nor his labour-power as
average labour-power. It would either be not saleable at all, or only
at something below the average value of labour-power. A fixed minimum
of efficiency in all labour is therefore assumed, and we shall see,
later on, that capitalist production provides the means of fixing this
minimum. Nevertheless, this minimum deviates from the average, although
on the other hand the capitalist has to pay the average value of
labour-power. Of the six small masters, one would therefore squeeze out
more than the average rate of surplus value, another less. The
inequalities would be compensated for the society at large, but not for
the individual masters. Thus the laws of the production of value are
only fully realised for the individual producer, when he produces as a
capitalist, and employs a number of workmen together, whose labour, by
its collective nature, is at once stamped as average social labour.

Even without an alteration in the system of working, the simultaneous
employment of a large number of labourers effects a revolution in the
material conditions of the labour-process. The buildings in which they
work, the store-houses for the raw material, the implements and
utensils used simultaneously or in turns by the workmen; in short, a
portion of the means of production, are now consumed in common. On the
one hand, the exchange-value of these means of production is not
increased; for the exchange-value of a commodity is not raised by its
use-value being consumed more thoroughly and to greater advantage. On
the other hand, they are used in common, and therefore on a larger
scale than before. A room where twenty weavers work at twenty looms
must be larger than the room of a single weaver with two assistants.
But it costs less labour to build one workshop for twenty persons than
to build ten to accommodate two weavers each; thus the value of the
means of production that are concentrated for use in common on a large
scale does not increase in direct proportion to the expansion and to
the increased useful effect of those means. When consumed in common,
they give up a smaller part of their value to each single product;
partly because the total value they part with is spread over a greater
quantity of products, and partly because their value, though absolutely
greater, is, having regard to their sphere of action in the process,
relatively less than the value of isolated means of production. Owing
to this, the value of a part of the constant capital falls, and in
proportion to the magnitude of the fall, the total value of the
commodity also falls. The effect is the same as if the means of
production had cost less. The economy in their application is entirely
owing to their being consumed in common by a large number of workmen.
Moreover, this character of being necessary conditions of social
labour, a character that distinguishes them from the dispersed and
relatively more costly means of production of isolated, independent
labourers, or small masters, is acquired even when the numerous workmen
assembled together do not assist one another, but merely work side by
side. A portion of the instruments of labour acquires this social
character before the labour-process itself does so.

Economy in the use of the means of production has to be considered
under two aspects. First, as cheapening commodities, and thereby
bringing about a fall in the value of labour-power. Secondly, as
altering the ratio of the surplus value to the total capital advanced,
i.e., to the sum of the values of the constant and variable capital.
The latter aspect will not be considered until we come to the third
book, to which, with the object of treating them in their proper
connexion, we also relegate many other points that relate to the
present question. The march of our analysis compels this splitting up
of the subject-matter, a splitting up that is quite in keeping with the
spirit of capitalist production. For since, in this mode of production,
the workman finds the instruments of labour existing independently of
him as another man's property, economy in their use appears, with
regard to him, to be a distinct operation, one that does not concern
him, and which, therefore, has no connexion with the methods by which
his own personal productiveness is increased.

When numerous labourers work together side by side, whether in one and
the same process, or in different but connected processes, they are
said to co-operate, or to work in co-operation.

Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive
power of a regiment of infantry is essentially different from the sum
of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual cavalry or
infantry soldiers taken separately, so the sum total of the mechanical
forces exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that
is developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and the
same undivided operation, such as raising a heavy weight, turning a
winch, or removing an obstacle. In such cases the effect of the
combined labour could either not be produced at all by isolated
individual labour, or it could only be produced by a great expenditure
of time, or on a very dwarfed scale. Not only have we here an increase
in the productive power of the individual, by means of co-operation,
but the creation of a new power, namely, the collective power of
masses.

Apart from the new power that arises from the fusion of many forces
into one single force, mere social contact begets in most industries an
emulation and a stimulation of the animal spirits that heighten the
efficiency of each individual workman. Hence it is that a dozen persons
working together will, in their collective working day of 144 hours,
produce far more than twelve isolated men each working 12 hours, or
than one man who works twelve days in succession. The reason of this is
that man is, if not as Aristotle contends, a political, at all events a
social animal.

Although a number of men may be occupied together at the same time on
the same, or the same kind of work, yet the labour of each, as a part
of the collective labour, may correspond to a distinct phase of the
labour-process, through all whose phases, in consequence of
co-operation, the subject of their labour passes with greater speed.
For instance, if a dozen masons place themselves in a row, so as to
pass stones from the foot of a ladder to its summit, each of them does
the same thing; nevertheless, their separate acts form connected parts
of one total operation; they are particular phases, which must be gone
through by each stone; and the stones are thus carried up quicker by
the 24 hands of the row of men than they could be if each man went
separately up and down the ladder with his burden. The object is
carried over the same distance in a shorter time. Again, a combination
of labour occurs whenever a building, for instance, is taken in hand on
different sides simultaneously; although here also the co-operating
masons are doing the same, or the same kind of work. The 12 masons, in
their collective working day of 144 hours, make much more progress with
the building than one mason could make working for 12 days, or 144
hours. The reason is, that a body of men working in concert has hands
and eyes both before and behind, and is, to a certain degree,
omnipresent. The various parts of the work progress simultaneously.

In the above instances we have laid stress upon the point that the men
do the same, or the same kind of work, because this, the most simple
form of labour in common, plays a great part in co-operation, even in
its most fully developed stage. If the work be complicated, then the
mere number of the men who co-operate allows of the various operations
being apportioned to different hands, and, consequently, of being
carried on simultaneously. The time necessary for the completion of the
whole work is thereby shortened.

In many industries, there are critical periods, determined by the
nature of the process, during which certain definite results must be
obtained. For instance, if a flock of sheep has to be shorn, or a field
of wheat to be cut and harvested, the quantity and quality of the
product depends on the work being begun and ended within a certain
time. In these cases, the time that ought to be taken by the process is
prescribed, just as it is in herring fishing. A single person cannot
carve a working day of more than, say 12 hours, out of the natural day,
but 100 men co-operating extend the working day to 1,200 hours. The
shortness of the time allowed for the work is compensated for by the
large mass of labour thrown upon the field of production at the
decisive moment. The completion of the task within the proper time
depends on the simultaneous application of numerous combined working
days; the amount of useful effect depends on the number of labourers;
this number, however, is always smaller than the number of isolated
labourers required to do the same amount of work in the same period.0
It is owing to the absence of this kind of co-operation that, in the
western part of the United States, quantities of corn, and in those
parts of East India where English rule has destroyed the old
communities, quantities of cotton, are yearly wasted.1

On the one hand, co-operation allows of the work being carried on over
an extended space; it is consequently imperatively called for in
certain undertakings, such as draining, constructing dykes, irrigation
works, and the making of canals, roads and railways. On the other hand,
while extending the scale of production, it renders possible a relative
contraction of the arena. This contraction of arena simultaneous with,
and arising from, extension of scale, whereby a number of useless
expenses are cut down, is owing to the conglomeration of labourers, to
the aggregation of various processes, and to the concentration of the
means of production.2

The combined working day produces, relatively to an equal sum of
isolated working days, a greater quantity of use-values, and,
consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the production
of a given useful effect. Whether the combined working day, in a given
case, acquires this increased productive power, because it heightens
the mechanical force of labour, or extends its sphere of action over a
greater space, or contracts the field of production relatively to the
scale of production, or at the critical moment sets large masses of
labour to work, or excites emulation between individuals and raises
their animal spirits, or impresses on the similar operations carried on
by a number of men the stamp of continuity and many-sidedness, or
performs simultaneously different operations, or economises the means
of production by use in common, or lends to individual labour the
character of average social labour whichever of these be the cause of
the increase, the special productive power of the combined working day
is, under all circumstances, the social productive power of labour, or
the productive power of social labour. This power is due to
co-operation itself. When the labourer co-operates systematically with
others, he strips off the fetters of his individuality, and develops
the capabilities of his species.3

As a general rule, labourers cannot co-operate without being brought
together: their assemblage in one place is a necessary condition of
their co-operation. Hence wage-labourers cannot co-operate, unless they
are employed simultaneously by the same capital, the same capitalist,
and unless therefore their labour-powers are bought simultaneously by
him. The total value of these labour-powers, or the amount of the wages
of these labourers for a day, or a week, as the case may be, must be
ready in the pocket of the capitalist, before the workmen are assembled
for the process of production. The payment of 300 workmen at once,
though only for one day, requires a greater outlay of capital, than
does the payment of a smaller number of men, week by week, during a
whole year. Hence the number of the labourers that co-operate, or the
scale of co-operation, depends, in the first instance, on the amount of
capital that the individual capitalist can spare for the purchase of
labour-power; in other words, on the extent to which a single
capitalist has command over the means of subsistence of a number of
labourers.

And as with the variable, so it is with the constant capital. For
example, the outlay on raw material is 30 times as great, for the
capitalist who employs 300 men, as it is for each of the 30 capitalists
who employ 10 men. The value and quantity of the instruments of labour
used in common do not, it is true, increase at the same rate as the
number of workmen, but they do increase very considerably. Hence,
concentration of large masses of the means of production in the hands
of individual capitalists, is a material condition for the co-operation
of wage-labourers, and the extent of the co-operation or the scale of
production, depends on the extent of this concentration.

We saw in a former chapter, that a certain minimum amount of capital
was necessary, in order that the number of labourers simultaneously
employed, and, consequently, the amount of surplus value produced,
might suffice to liberate the employer himself from manual labour, to
convert him from a small master into a capitalist, and thus formally to
establish capitalist production. We now see that a certain minimum
amount is a necessary condition for the conversion of numerous isolated
and independent processes into one combined social process.

We also saw that at first, the subjection of labour to capital was only
a formal result of the fact, that the labourer, instead of working for
himself, works for and consequently under the capitalist. By the
co-operation of numerous wage-labourers, the sway of capital develops
into a requisite for carrying on the labour-process itself, into a real
requisite of production. That a capitalist should command on the field
of production, is now as indispensable as that a general should command
on the field of battle.

All combined labour on a large scale requires, more or less, a
directing authority, in order to secure the harmonious working of the
individual activities, and to perform the general functions that have
their origin in the action of the combined organism, as distinguished
from the action of its separate organs. A single violin player is his
own conductor; an orchestra requires a separate one. The work of
directing, superintending, and adjusting, becomes one of the functions
of capital, from the moment that the labour under the control of
capital, becomes co-operative. Once a function of capital, it acquires
special characteristics.

The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist production, is to
extract the greatest possible amount of surplus value,4 and
consequently to exploit labour-power to the greatest possible extent.
As the number of the co-operating labourers increases, so too does
their resistance to the domination of capital, and with it, the
necessity for capital to overcome this resistance by counterpressure.
The control exercised by the capitalist is not only a special function,
due to the nature of the social labour-process, and peculiar to that
process, but it is, at the same time, a function of the exploitation of
a social labour-process, and is consequently rooted in the unavoidable
antagonism between the exploiter and the living and labouring raw
material he exploits.

Again, in proportion to the increasing mass of the means of production,
now no longer the property of the labourer, but of the capitalist, the
necessity increases for some effective control over the proper
application of those means.5 Moreover, the co-operation of wage
labourers is entirely brought about by the capital that employs them.
Their union into one single productive body and the establishment of a
connexion between their individual functions, are matters foreign and
external to them, are not their own act, but the act of the capital
that brings and keeps them together. Hence the connexion existing
between their various labours appears to them, ideally, in the shape of
a preconceived plan of the capitalist, and practically in the shape of
the authority of the same capitalist, in the shape of the powerful will
of another, who subjects their activity to his aims. If, then, the
control of the capitalist is in substance two-fold by reason of the
two-fold nature of the process of production itself, which, on the one
hand, is a social process for producing use-values, on the other, a
process for creating surplus value in form that control is despotic. As
co-operation extends its scale, this despotism takes forms peculiar to
itself. Just as at first the capitalist is relieved from actual labour
so soon as his capital has reached that minimum amount with which
capitalist production, as such, begins, so now, he hands over the work
of direct and constant supervision of the individual workmen, and
groups of workmen, to a special kind of wage-labourer. An industrial
army of workmen, under the command of a capitalist, requires, like a
real army, officers (managers), and sergeants (foremen, overlookers),
who, while the work is being done, command in the name of the
capitalist. The work of supervision becomes their established and
exclusive function. When comparing the mode of production of isolated
peasants and artisans with production by slave-labour, the political
economist counts this labour of superintendence among the "faux frais"
of production.6 But, when considering the capitalist mode of
production, he, on the contrary, treats the work of control made
necessary by the co-operative character of the labour-process as
identical with the different work of control, necessitated by the
capitalist character of that process and the antagonism of interests
between capitalist and labourer.7 It is not because he is a leader of
industry that a man is a capitalist; on the contrary, he is a leader of
industry because he is a capitalist. The leadership of industry is an
attribute of capital, just as in feudal times the functions of general
and judge, were attributes of landed property.8

The labourer is the owner of his labour-power until he has done
bargaining for its sale with the capitalist; and he can sell no more
than what he has i.e., his individual, isolated labour-power. This
state of things is in no way altered by the fact that the capitalist,
instead of buying the labour-power of one man, buys that of 100, and
enters into separate contracts with 100 unconnected men instead of with
one. He is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, without letting them
co-operate. He pays them the value of 100 independent labour-powers,
but he does not pay for the combined labour-power of the hundred. Being
independent of each other, the labourers are isolated persons, who
enter into relations with the capitalist, but not with one another.
This co-operation begins only with the labour-process, but they have
then ceased to belong to themselves. On entering that process, they
become incorporated with capital. As co-operators, as members of a
working organism, they are but special modes of existence of capital.
Hence, the productive power developed by the labourer when working in
co-operation, is the productive power of capital. This power is
developed gratuitously, whenever the workmen are placed under given
conditions, and it is capital that places them under such conditions.
Because this power costs capital nothing, and because, on the other
hand, the labourer himself does not develop it before his labour
belongs to capital, it appears as a power with which capital is endowed
by Nature a productive power that is immanent in capital.

The colossal effects of simple co-operation are to be seen in the
gigantic structures of the ancient Asiatics, Egyptians, Etruscans, &c.

'It has happened in times past that these Oriental States, after
supplying the expenses of their civil and military establishments, have
found themselves in possession of a surplus which they could apply to
works of magnificence or utility and in the construction of these their
command over the hands and arms of almost the entire non-agricultural
population has produced stupendous monuments which still indicate their
power. The teeming valley of the Nile ... produced food for a swarming
non-agricultural population, and this food, belonging to the monarch
and the priesthood, afforded the means of erecting the mighty monuments
which filled the land.... In moving the colossal statues and vast
masses of which the transport creates wonder, human labour almost
alone, was prodigally used.... The number of the labourers and the
concentration of their efforts sufficed. We see mighty coral reefs
rising from the depths of the ocean into islands and firm land, yet
each individual depositor is puny, weak, and contemptible. The
non-agricultural labourers of an Asiatic monarchy have little but their
individual bodily exertions to bring to the task, but their number is
their strength, and the power of directing these masses gave rise to
the palaces and temples, the pyramids, and the armies of gigantic
statues of which the remains astonish and perplex us. It is that
confinement of the revenues which feed them, to one or a few hands,
which makes such undertakings possible.'9

This power of Asiatic and Egyptian kings, Etruscan theocrats, &c., has
in modern society been transferred to the capitalist, whether he be an
isolated, or as in joint-stock companies, a collective capitalist.

Co-operation, such as we find it at the dawn of human development,
among races who live by the chase,0 or, say, in the agriculture of
Indian communities, is based, on the one hand, on ownership in common
of the means of production, and on the other hand, on the fact, that in
those cases, each individual has no more torn himself off from the
navel-string of his tribe or community, than each bee has freed itself
from connexion with the hive. Such co-operation is distinguished from
capitalistic co-operation by both of the above characteristics. The
sporadic application of co-operation on a large scale in ancient times,
in the middle ages, and in modern colonies, reposes on relations of
dominion and servitude, principally on slavery. The capitalistic form,
on the contrary, pre-supposes from first to last, the free
wage-labourer, who sells his labour-power to capital. Historically,
however, this form is developed in opposition to peasant agriculture
and to the carrying on of independent handicrafts whether in guilds or
not.1 From the standpoint of these, capitalistic co-operation does not
manifest itself as a particular historical form of co-operation, but
co-operation itself appears to be a historical form peculiar to, and
specifically distinguishing, the capitalist process of production.

Just as the social productive power of labour that is developed by
co-operation, appears to be the productive power of capital, so
co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of production carried
on by isolated independent labourers, or even by small employers,
appears to be a specific form of the capitalist process of production.
It is the first change experienced by the actual labour-process, when
subjected to capital. This change takes place spontaneously. The
simultaneous employment of a large number of wage-labourers, in one and
the same process, which is a necessary condition of this change, also
forms the starting-point of capitalist production. This point coincides
with the birth of capital itself. If then, on the one hand, the
capitalist mode of production presents itself to us historically, as a
necessary condition to the transformation of the labour-process into a
social process, so, on the other hand, this social form of the
labour-process presents itself, as a method employed by capital for the
more profitable exploitation of labour, by increasing that labour's
productiveness.

In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto viewed it,
co-operation is a necessary concomitant of all production on a large
scale, but it does not, in itself, represent a fixed form
characteristic of a particular epoch in the development of the
capitalist mode of production. At the most it appears to do so, and
that only approximately, in the handicraft-like beginnings of
manufacture,2 and in that kind of agriculture on a large scale, which
corresponds to the epoch of manufacture, and is distinguished from
peasant agriculture, mainly by the number of the labourers
simultaneously employed, and by the mass of the means of production
concentrated for their use. Simple co-operation is always the
prevailing form, in those branches of production in which capital
operates on a large scale, and division of labour and machinery play
but a subordinate part.

Co-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the capitalist
mode of production, nevertheless the elementary form of co-operation
continues to subsist as a particular form of capitalist production side
by side with the more developed forms of that mode of production.


== Chapter 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture = =

=== Section 1: Two-Fold Origin of Manufacture == =

That co-operation which is based on division of labour, assumes its
typical form in manufacture, and is the prevalent characteristic form
of the capitalist process of production throughout the manufacturing
period properly so called. That period, roughly speaking, extends from
the middle of the 16th to the last third of the 18th century.

Manufacture takes its rise in two ways:

(1.) By the assemblage, in one workshop under the control of a single
capitalist, of labourers belonging to various independent handicrafts,
but through whose hands a given article must pass on its way to
completion. A carriage, for example, was formerly the product of the
labour of a great number of independent artificers, such as
wheelwrights, harness-makers, tailors, locksmiths, upholsterers,
turners, fringe-makers, glaziers, painters, polishers, gilders, &c. In
the manufacture of carriages, however, all these different artificers
are assembled in one building where they work into one another's hands.
It is true that a carriage cannot be gilt before it has been made. But
if a number of carriages are being made simultaneously, some may be in
the hands of the gilders while others are going through an earlier
process. So far, we are still in the domain of simple co-operation,
which finds its materials ready to hand in the shape of men and things.
But very soon an important change takes place. The tailor, the
locksmith, and the other artificers, being now exclusively occupied in
carriage-making, each gradually loses, through want of practice, the
ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. But, on
the other hand, his activity now confined in one groove, assumes the
form best adapted to the narrowed sphere of action. At first, carriage
manufacture is a combination of various independent handicrafts. By
degrees, it becomes the splitting up of carriage-making into its
various detail processes, each of which crystallises into the exclusive
function of a particular workman, the manufacture, as a whole, being
carried on by the men in conjunction. In the same way, cloth
manufacture, as also a whole series of other manufactures, arose by
combining different handicrafts together under the control of a single
capitalist.

(2.) Manufacture also arises in a way exactly the reverse of this
namely, by one capitalist employing simultaneously in one workshop a
number of artificers, who all do the same, or the same kind of work,
such as making paper, type, or needles. This is co-operation in its
most elementary form. Each of these artificers (with the help, perhaps,
of one or two apprentices), makes the entire commodity, and he
consequently performs in succession all the operations necessary for
its production. He still works in his old handicraft-like way. But very
soon external circumstances cause a different use to be made of the
concentration of the workmen on one spot, and of the simultaneousness
of their work. An increased quantity of the article has perhaps to be
delivered within a given time. The work is therefore re-distributed.
Instead of each man being allowed to perform all the various operations
in succession, these operations are changed into disconnected, isolated
ones, carried on side by side; each is assigned to a different
artificer, and the whole of them together are performed simultaneously
by the co-operating workmen. This accidental repartition gets repeated,
develops advantages of its own, and gradually ossifies into a
systematic division of labour. The commodity, from being the individual
product of an independent artificer, becomes the social product of a
union of artificers, each of whom performs one, and only one, of the
constituent partial operations. The same operations which, in the case
of a papermaker belonging to a German Guild, merged one into the other
as the successive acts of one artificer, became in the Dutch paper
manufacture so many partial operations carried on side by side by
numerous co-operating labourers. The needlemaker of the Nuremberg Guild
was the cornerstone on which the English needle manufacture was raised.
But while in Nuremberg that single artificer performed a series of
perhaps 20 operations one after another, in England it was not long
before there were 20 needlemakers side by side, each performing one
alone of those 20 operations, and in consequence of further experience,
each of those 20 operations was again split up, isolated, and made the
exclusive function of a separate workman.

The mode in which manufacture arises, its growth out of handicrafts, is
therefore two-fold. On the one hand, it arises from the union of
various independent handicrafts, which become stripped of their
independence and specialised to such an extent as to be reduced to mere
supplementary partial processes in the production of one particular
commodity. On the other hand, it arises from the co-operation of
artificers of one handicraft; it splits up that particular handicraft
into its various detail operations, isolating, and making these
operations independent of one another up to the point where each
becomes the exclusive function of a particular labourer. On the one
hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces diversion of labour into
a process of production, or further develops that division; on the
other hand, it unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate.
But whatever may have been its particular starting-point, its final
form is invariably the same a productive mechanism whose parts are
human beings.

For a proper understanding of the division of labour in manufacture, it
is essential that the following points be firmly grasped. First, the
decomposition of a process of production into its various successive
steps coincides, here, strictly with the resolution of a handicraft
into its successive manual operations. Whether complex or simple, each
operation has to be done by hand, retains the character of a
handicraft, and is therefore dependent on the strength, skill,
quickness, and sureness, of the individual workman in handling his
tools. The handicraft continues to be the basis. This narrow technical
basis excludes a really scientific analysis of any definite process of
industrial production, since it is still a condition that each detail
process gone through by the product must be capable of being done by
hand and of forming, in its way, a separate handicraft. It is just
because handicraft skill continues, in this way, to be the foundation
of the process of production, that each workman becomes exclusively
assigned to a partial function, and that for the rest of his life, his
labour-power is turned into the organ of this detail function.

Secondly, this division of labour is a particular sort of co-operation,
and many of its disadvantages spring from the general character of
co-operation, and not from this particular form of it.

=== Section 2: The Detail Labourer and his Implements == =

If we now go more into detail, it is, in the first place, clear that a
labourer who all his life performs one and the same simple operation,
converts his whole body into the automatic, specialised implement of
that operation. Consequently, he takes less time in doing it, than the
artificer who performs a whole series of operations in succession. But
the collective labourer, who constitutes the living mechanism of
manufacture, is made up solely of such specialised detail labourers.
Hence, in comparison with the independent handicraft, more is produced
in a given time, or the productive power of labour is increased.
Moreover, when once this fractional work is established as the
exclusive function of one person, the methods it employs become
perfected. The workman's continued repetition of the same simple act,
and the concentration of his attention on it, teach him by experience
how to attain the desired effect with the minimum of exertion. But
since there are always several generations of labourers living at one
time, and working together at the manufacture of a given article, the
technical skill, the tricks of the trade thus acquired, become
established, and are accumulated and handed down.

Manufacture, in fact, produces the skill of the detail labourer, by
reproducing, and systematically driving to an extreme within the
workshop, the naturally developed differentiation of trades which it
found ready to hand in society at large. On the other hand, the
conversion of fractional work into the life-calling of one man,
corresponds to the tendency shown by earlier societies, to make trades
hereditary; either to petrify them into castes, or whenever definite
historical conditions beget in the individual a tendency to vary in a
manner incompatible with the nature of castes, to ossify them into
guilds. Castes and guilds arise from the action of the same natural
law, that regulates the differentiation of plants and animals into
species and varieties, except that, when a certain degree of
development has been reached, the heredity of castes and the
exclusiveness of guilds are ordained as a law of society.

'The muslins of Dakka in fineness, the calicoes and other piece goods
of Coromandel in brilliant and durable colours, have never been
surpassed. Yet they are produced without capital, machinery, division
of labour, or any of those means which give such facilities to the
manufacturing interest of Europe. The weaver is merely a detached
individual, working a web when ordered of a customer, and with a loom
of the rudest construction, consisting sometimes of a few branches or
bars of wood, put roughly together. There is even no expedient for
rolling up the warp; the loom must therefore be kept stretched to its
full length, and becomes so inconveniently large, that it cannot be
contained within the hut of the manufacturer, who is therefore
compelled to ply his trade in the open air, where it is interrupted by
every vicissitude of the weather.'

It is only the special skill accumulated from generation to generation,
and transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does
to the spider, this proficiency. And yet the work of such a Hindu
weaver is very complicated, compared with that of a manufacturing
labourer.

An artificer, who performs one after another the various fractional
operations in the production of a finished article, must at one time
change his place, at another his tools. The transition from one
operation to another interrupts the flow of his labour, and creates, so
to say, gaps in his working day. These gaps close up so soon as he is
tied to one and the same operation all day long; they vanish in
proportion as the changes in his work diminish. The resulting increased
productive power is owing either to an increased expenditure of
labour-power in a given time i.e., to increased intensity of labour or
to a decrease in the amount of labour-power unproductively consumed.
The extra expenditure of power, demanded by every transition from rest
to motion, is made up for by prolonging the duration of the normal
velocity when once acquired. On the other hand, constant labour of one
uniform kind disturbs the intensity and flow of a man's animal spirits,
which find recreation and delight in mere change of activity.

The productiveness of labour depends not only on the proficiency of the
workman, but on the perfection of his tools. Tools of the same kind,
such as knives, drills, gimlets. hammers, &c., may be employed in
different processes; and the same tool may serve various purposes in a
single process. But so soon as the different operations of a
labour-process are disconnected the one from the other, and each
fractional operation acquires in the hands of the detail labourer a
suitable and peculiar form, alterations become necessary in the
implements that previously served more than one purpose. The direction
taken by this change is determined by the difficulties experienced in
consequence of the unchanged form of the implement. Manufacture is
characterised by the differentiation of the instruments of labour a
differentiation whereby implements of a given sort acquire fixed
shapes, adapted to each particular application, and by the
specialisation of those instruments, giving to each special implement
its full play only in the hands of a specific detail labourer. In
Birmingham alone 500 varieties of hammers are produced, and not only is
each adapted to one particular process, but several varieties often
serve exclusively for the different operations in one and the same
process. The manufacturing period simplifies, improves, and multiplies
the implements of labour, by adapting them to the exclusively special
functions of each detail labourer. It thus creates at the same time one
of the material conditions for the existence of machinery, which
consists of a combination of simple instruments.

The detail labourer and his implements are the simplest elements of
manufacture. Let us now turn to its aspect as a whole.

=== Section 3: The Two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture: Heterogeneous
Manufacture, Serial Manufacture == =

The organisation of manufacture has two fundamental forms which, in
spite of occasional blending, are essentially different in kind, and,
moreover, play very distinct parts in the subsequent transformation of
manufacture into modern industry carried on by machinery. This double
character arises from the nature of the article produced. This article
either results from the mere mechanical fitting together of partial
products made independently, or owes its completed shape to a series of
connected processes and manipulations.

A locomotive, for instance, consists of more than 5,000 independent
parts. It cannot, however, serve as an example of the first kind of
genuine manufacture, for it is a structure produced by modern
mechanical industry. But a watch can; and William Petty used it to
illustrate the division of labour in manufacture. Formerly the
individual work of a Nuremberg artificer, the watch has been
transformed into the social product of an immense number of detail
labourers, such as mainspring makers, dial makers, spiral spring
makers, jewelled hole makers, ruby lever makers, hand makers, case
makers, screw makers, gilders, with numerous subdivisions, such as
wheel makers (brass and steel separate), pin makers, movement makers,
acheveur de pignon (fixes the wheels on the axles, polishes the facets,
&c.), pivot makers, planteur de finissage (puts the wheels and springs
in the works), finisseur de barillet (cuts teeth in the wheels, makes
the holes of the right size, &c.), escapement makers, cylinder makers
for cylinder escapements, escapement wheel makers, balance wheel
makers, raquette makers (apparatus for regulating the watch), the
planteur d'√©chappement (escapement maker proper); then the repasseur
de barillet (finishes the box for the spring, &c.), steel polishers,
wheel polishers, screw polishers, figure painters, dial enamellers
(melt the enamel on the copper), fabricant de pendants (makes the ring
by which the case is hung), finisseur de charni√®re (puts the brass
hinge in the cover, &c.), faiseur de secret (puts in the springs that
open the case), graveur, ciseleur, polisseur de bo√Æte, &c., &c., and
last of all the repasseur, who fits together the whole watch and hands
it over in a going state. Only a few parts of the watch pass through
several hands; and all these membra disjecta come together for the
first time in the hand that binds them into one mechanical whole. This
external relation between the finished product, and its various and
diverse elements makes it, as well in this case as in the case of all
similar finished articles, a matter of chance whether the detail
labourers are brought together in one workshop or not. The detail
operations may further be carried on like so many independent
handicrafts, as they are in the Cantons of Vaud and Neufch√¢tel; while
in Geneva there exist large watch manufactories where the detail
labourers directly co-operate under the control of a single capitalist.
And even in the latter case the dial, the springs, and the case, are
seldom made in the factory itself. To carry on the trade as a
manufacture, with concentration of workmen, is, in the watch trade,
profitable only under exceptional conditions, because competition is
greater between the labourers who desire to work at home, and because
the splitting up of the work into a number of heterogeneous processes,
permits but little use of the instruments of labour in common, and the
capitalist, by scattering the work, saves the outlay on workshops, &c.
Nevertheless the position of this detail labourer who, though he works
at home, does so for a capitalist (manufacturer, √©tablisseur), is very
different from that of the independent artificer, who works for his own
customers.

The second kind of manufacture, its perfected form, produces articles
that go through connected phases of development, through a series of
processes step by step, like the wire in the manufacture of needles,
which passes through the hands of 72 and sometimes even 92 different
detail workmen.

In so far as such a manufacture, when first started, combines scattered
handicrafts, it lessens the space by which the various phases of
production are separated from each other. The time taken in passing
from one stage to another is shortened, so is the labour that
effectuates this passage. In comparison with a handicraft, productive
power is gained, and this gain is owing to the general co-operative
character of manufacture. On the other hand, division of labour, which
is the distinguishing principle of manufacture, requires the isolation
of the various stages of production and their independence of each
other. The establishment and maintenance of a connexion between the
isolated functions necessitates the incessant transport of the article
from one hand to another, and from one process to another. From the
standpoint of modern mechanical industry, this necessity stands forth
as a characteristic and costly disadvantage, and one that is immanent
in the principle of manufacture.0

If we confine our attention to some particular lot of raw materials, of
rags, for instance, in paper manufacture, or of wire in needle
manufacture, we perceive that it passes in succession through a series
of stages in the hands of the various detail workmen until completion.
On the other hand, if we look at the workshop as a whole, we see the
raw material in all the stages of its production at the same time. The
collective labourer, with one set of his many hands armed with one kind
of tools, draws the wire, with another set, armed with different tools,
he, at the same time, straightens it, with another, he cuts it, with
another, points it, and so on. The different detail processes, which
were successive in time, have become simultaneous, go on side by side
in space. Hence, production of a greater quantum of finished
commodities in a given time.1 This simultaneity, it is true, is due to
the general co-operative form of the process as a whole; but
Manufacture not only finds the conditions for co-operation ready to
hand, it also, to some extent, creates them by the sub-division of
handicraft labour. On the other hand, it accomplishes this social
organisation of the labour-process only by riveting each labourer to a
single fractional detail.

Since the fractional product of each detail labourer is, at the same
time, only a particular stage in the development of one and the same
finished article, each labourer, or each group of labourers, prepares
the raw material for another labourer or group. The result of the
labour of the one is the starting-point for the labour of the other.
The one workman therefore gives occupation directly to the other. The
labour-time necessary in each partial process, for attaining the
desired effect, is learnt by experience; and the mechanism of
Manufacture, as a whole, is based on the assumption that a given result
will be obtained in a given time. It is only on this assumption that
the various supplementary labour-processes can proceed uninterruptedly,
simultaneously, and side by side. It is clear that this direct
dependence of the operations, and therefore of the labourers, on each
other, compels each one of them to spend on his work no more than the
necessary time, and thus a continuity, uniformity, regularity, order,2
and even intensity of labour, of quite a different kind, is begotten
than is to be found in an independent handicraft or even in simple
co-operation. The rule, that the labour-time expended on a commodity
should not exceed that which is socially necessary for its production,
appears, in the production of commodities generally, to be established
by the mere effect of competition; since, to express ourselves
superficially, each single producer is obliged to sell his commodity at
its market-price. In Manufacture, on the contrary, the turning out of a
given quantum of product in a given time is a technical law of the
process of production itself.3

Different operations take, however, unequal periods, and yield
therefore, in equal times unequal quantities of fractional products.
If, therefore, the same labourer has, day after day, to perform the
same operation, there must be a different number of labourers for each
operation; for instance, in type manufacture, there are four founders
and two breakers to one rubber: the founder casts 2,000 type an hour,
the breaker breaks up 4,000, and the rubber polishes 8,000. Here we
have again the principle of co-operation in its simplest form, the
simultaneous employment of many doing the same thing; only now, this
principle is the expression of an organic relation. The division of
labour, as carried out in Manufacture, not only simplifies and
multiplies the qualitatively different parts of the social collective
labourer, but also creates a fixed mathematical relation or ratio which
regulates the quantitative extent of those parts i.e., the relative
number of labourers, or the relative size of the group of labourers,
for each detail operation. It develops, along with the qualitative
sub-division of the social labour-process, a quantitative rule and
proportionality for that process.

When once the most fitting proportion has been experimentally
established for the numbers of the detail labourers in the various
groups when producing on a given scale, that scale can be extended only
by employing a multiple of each particular group.4 There is this to
boot, that the same individual can do certain kinds of work just as
well on a large as on a small scale; for instance, the labour of
superintendence, the carriage of the fractional product from one stage
to the next, &c. The isolation of such functions, their allotment to a
particular labourer, does not become advantageous till after an
increase in the number of labourers employed; but this increase must
affect every group proportionally.

The isolated group of labourers to whom any particular detail function
is assigned, is made up of homogeneous elements, and is one of the
constituent parts of the total mechanism. In many manufactures,
however, the group itself is an organised body of labour, the total
mechanism being a repetition or multiplication of these elementary
organisms. Take, for instance, the manufacture of glass bottles. It may
be resolved into three essentially different stages. First, the
preliminary stage, consisting of the preparation of the components of
the glass, mixing the sand and lime, &c., and melting them into a fluid
mass of glass.5 Various detail labourers are employed in this first
stage, as also in the final one of removing the bottles from the drying
furnace, sorting and packing them, &c. In the middle, between these two
stages, comes the glass melting proper, the manipulation of the fluid
mass. At each mouth of the furnace, there works a group, called 'the
hole,' consisting of one bottlemaker or finisher, one blower, one
gatherer, one putter-up or whetter-off, and one taker-in. These five
detail workers are so many special organs of a single working organism
that acts only as a whole, and therefore can operate only by the direct
co-operation of the whole five. The whole body is paralysed if but one
of its members be wanting. But a glass furnace has several openings (in
England from 4 to 6), each of which contains an earthenware melting-pot
full of molten glass, and employs a similar five-membered group of
workers. The organisation of each group is based on division of labour,
but the bond between the different groups is simple co-operation,
which, by using in common one of the means of production, the furnace,
causes it to be more economically consumed. Such a furnace, with its
4-6 groups, constitutes a glass house; and a glass manufactory
comprises a number of such glass houses, together with the apparatus
and workmen requisite for the preparatory and final stages.

Finally, just as Manufacture arises in part from the combination of
various handicrafts, so, too, it develops into a combination of various
manufactures. The larger English glass manufacturers, for instance,
make their own earthenware melting-pots, because, on the quality of
these depends, to a great extent, the success or failure of the
process. The manufacture of one of the means of production is here
united with that of the product. On the other hand, the manufacture of
the product may be united with other manufactures, of which that
product is the raw material, or with the products of which it is itself
subsequently mixed. Thus, we find the manufacture of flint glass
combined with that of glass cutting and brass founding; the latter for
the metal settings of various articles of glass. The various
manufactures so combined form more or less separate departments of a
larger manufacture, but are at the same time independent processes,
each with its own division of labour. In spite of the many advantages
offered by this combination of manufactures, it never grows into a
complete technical system on its own foundation. That happens only on
its transformation into an industry carried on by machinery.

Early in the manufacturing period, the principle of lessening the
necessary labour-time in the production of commodities6 , was accepted
and formulated: and the use of machines, especially for certain simple
first processes that have to be conducted on a very large scale, and
with the application of great force, sprang up here and there. Thus, at
an early period in paper manufacture, the tearing up of the rags was
done by paper-mills; and in metal works, the pounding of the ores was
effected by stamping mills.7 The Roman Empire had handed down the
elementary form of all machinery in the water-wheel.8

The handicraft period bequeathed to us the great inventions of the
compass, of gunpowder, of type-printing, and of the automatic clock.
But, on the whole, machinery played that subordinate part which Adam
Smith assigns to it in comparison with division of labour.9 The
sporadic use of machinery in the 17th century was of the greatest
importance, because it supplied the great mathematicians of that time
with a practical basis and stimulant to the creation of the science of
mechanics.

The collective labourer, formed by the combination of a number of
detail labourers, is the machinery specially characteristic of the
manufacturing period. The various operations that are performed in
turns by the producer of a commodity, and coalesce one with another
during the progress of production, lay claim to him in various ways. In
one operation he must exert more strength, in another more skill, in
another more attention; and the same individual does not possess all
these qualities in an equal degree. After Manufacture has once
separated, made independent, and isolated the various operations, the
labourers are divided, classified, and grouped according to their
predominating qualities. If their natural endowments are, on the one
hand, the foundation on which the division of labour is built up, on
the other hand, Manufacture, once introduced, develops in them new
powers that are by nature fitted only for limited and special
functions. The collective labourer now possesses, in an equal degree of
excellence, all the qualities requisite for production, and expends
them in the most economical manner, by exclusively employing all his
organs, consisting of particular labourers, or groups of labourers, in
performing their special functions.0 The one-sidedness and the
deficiencies of the detail labourer become perfections when he is a
part of the collective labourer.1 The habit of doing only one thing
converts him into a never failing instrument, while his connexion with
the whole mechanism compels him to work with the regularity of the
parts of a machine.2

Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and complex,
both high and low, his members, the individual labour-powers, require
different degrees of training, and must therefore have different
values. Manufacture, therefore, develops a hierarchy of labour-powers,
to which there corresponds a scale of wages. If, on the one hand, the
individual labourers are appropriated and annexed for life by a limited
function; on the other hand, the various operations of the hierarchy
are parcelled out among the labourers according to both their natural
and their acquired capabilities.3 Every process of production, however,
requires certain simple manipulations, which every man is capable of
doing. They too are now severed from their connexion with the more
pregnant moments of activity, and ossified into exclusive functions of
specially appointed labourers. Hence, Manufacture begets, in every
handicraft that it seizes upon, a class of so-called unskilled
labourers, a class which handicraft industry strictly excluded. If it
develops a one-sided speciality into a perfection, at the expense of
the whole of a man's working capacity, it also begins to make a
speciality of the absence of all development. Alongside of the
hierarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of the labourers
into skilled and unskilled. For the latter, the cost of apprenticeship
vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of
artificers, in consequence of the functions being simplified. In both
cases the value of labour-power falls.4 An exception to this law holds
good whenever the decomposition of the labour-process begets new and
comprehensive functions, that either had no place at all, or only a
very modest one, in handicrafts. The fall in the value of labour-power,
caused by the disappearance or diminution of the expenses of
apprenticeship, implies a direct increase of surplus value for the
benefit of capital; for everything that shortens the necessary
labour-time required for the reproduction of labour-power, extends the
domain of surplus labour.

=== Section 4: Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division of
Labour in Society == =

We first considered the origin of Manufacture, then its simple
elements, then the detail labourer and his implements, and finally, the
totality of the mechanism. We shall now lightly touch upon the relation
between the division of labour in manufacture, and the social division
of labour, which forms the foundation of all production of commodities.

If we keep labour alone in view, we may designate the separation of
social production into its main divisions or "genera" -- viz.,
agriculture, industries, &c., as division of labour in general, and the
splitting up of these families into species and sub-species, as
division of labour in particular, and the division of labour within the
workshop as division of labour in singular or in detail.5

Division of labour in a society, and the corresponding tying down of
individuals to a particular calling, develops itself, just as does the
division of labour in manufacture, from opposite starting-points.
Within a family,6 and after further development within a tribe, there
springs up naturally a division of labour, caused by differences of sex
and age, a division that is consequently based on a purely
physiological foundation, which division enlarges its materials by the
expansion of the community, by the increase of population, and more
especially, by the conflicts between different tribes, and the
subjugation of one tribe by another. On the other hand, as I have
before remarked, the exchange of products springs up at the points
where different families, tribes, communities, come in contact; for, in
the beginning of civilisation, it is not private individuals but
families, tribes, &c., that meet on an independent footing. Different
communities find different means of production, and different means of
subsistence in their natural environment. Hence, their modes of
production, and of living, and their products are different. It is this
spontaneously developed difference which, when different communities
come in contact, calls forth the mutual exchange of products, and the
consequent gradual conversion of those products into commodities.
Exchange does not create the differences between the spheres of
production, but brings what are already different into relation, and
thus converts them into more or less inter-dependent branches of the
collective production of an enlarged society. In the latter case, the
social division of labour arises from the exchange between spheres of
production, that are originally distinct and independent of one
another. In the former, where the physiological division of labour is
the starting-point, the particular organs of a compact whole grow
loose, and break off, principally owing to the exchange of commodities
with foreign communities, and then isolate themselves so far, that the
sole bond, still connecting the various kinds of work, is the exchange
of the products as commodities. In the one case, it is the making
dependent what was before independent; in the other case, the making
independent what was before dependent.

The foundation of every division of labour that is well developed, and
brought about by the exchange of commodities, is the separation between
town and country.7 It may be said, that the whole economic history of
society is summed up in the movement of this antithesis. We pass it
over, however, for the present.

Just as a certain number of simultaneously employed labourers are the
material pre-requisites for division of labour in manufacture, so are
the number and density of the population, which here correspond to the
agglomeration in one workshop, a necessary condition for the division
of labour in society.8 Nevertheless, this density is more or less
relative. A relatively thinly populated country, with well-developed
means of communication, has a denser population than a more numerously
populated country, with badly-developed means of communication; and in
this sense the Northern States of the American Union, for instance, are
more thickly populated than India.9

Since the production and the circulation of commodities are the general
pre-requisites of the capitalist mode of production, division of labour
in manufacture demands, that division of labour in society at large
should previously have attained a certain degree of development.
Inversely, the former division reacts upon and develops and multiplies
the latter. Simultaneously, with the differentiation of the instruments
of labour, the industries that produce these instruments, become more
and more differentiated.0 If the manufacturing system seize upon an
industry, which, previously, was carried on in connexion with others,
either as a chief or as a subordinate industry, and by one producer,
these industries immediately separate their connexion, and become
independent. If it seize upon a particular stage in the production of a
commodity, the other stages of its production become converted into so
many independent industries. It has already been stated, that where the
finished article consists merely of a number of parts fitted together,
the detail operations may re-establish themselves as genuine and
separate handicrafts. In order to carry out more perfectly the division
of labour in manufacture, a single branch of production is, according
to the varieties of its raw material, or the various forms that one and
the same raw material may assume, split up into numerous, and to some
extent, entirely new manufactures. Accordingly, in France alone, in the
first half of the 18th century, over 100 different kinds of silk stuffs
were woven, and, in Avignon, it was law, that 'every apprentice should
devote himself to only one sort of fabrication, and should not learn
the preparation of several kinds of stuff at once.' The territorial
division of labour, which confines special branches of production to
special districts of a country, acquires fresh stimulus from the
manufacturing system, which exploits every special advantage.1 The
Colonial system and the opening out of the markets of the world, both
of which are included in the general conditions of existence of the
manufacturing period, furnish rich material for developing the division
of labour in society. It is not the place, here, to go on to show how
division of labour seizes upon, not only the economic, but every other
sphere of society, and everywhere lays the foundation of that all
engrossing system of specialising and sorting men, that development in
a man of one single faculty at the expense of all other faculties,
which caused A. Ferguson, the master of Adam Smith, to exclaim: 'We
make a nation of Helots, and have no free citizens.'2

But, in spite of the numerous analogies and links connecting them,
division of labour in the interior of a society, and that in the
interior of a workshop, differ not only in degree, but also in kind.
The analogy appears most indisputable where there is an invisible bond
uniting the various branches of trade. For instance the cattle-breeder
produces hides, the tanner makes the hides into leather, and the
shoemaker, the leather into boots. Here the thing produced by each of
them is but a step towards the final form, which is the product of all
their labours combined. There are, besides, all the various industries
that supply the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the shoemaker with the
means of production. Now it is quite possible to imagine, with Adam
Smith, that the difference between the above social division of labour,
and the division in manufacture, is merely subjective, exists merely
for the observer, who, in a manufacture, can see with one glance, all
the numerous operations being performed on one spot, while in the
instance given above, the spreading out of the work over great areas,
and the great number of people employed in each branch of labour,
obscure the connexion.3 But what is it that forms the bond between the
independent labours of the cattle-breeder, the tanner, and the
shoemaker? It is the fact that their respective products are
commodities. What, on the other hand, characterises division of labour
in manufactures? The fact that the detail labourer produces no
commodities.4 It is only the common product of all the detail labourers
that becomes a commodity.5 Division of labour in society is brought
about by the purchase and sale of the products of different branches of
industry, while the connexion between the detail operations in a
workshop, is due to the sale of the labour-power of several workmen to
one capitalist, who applies it as combined labour-power. The division
of labour in the workshop implies concentration of the means of
production in the hands of one capitalist; the division of labour in
society implies their dispersion among many independent producers of
commodities. While within the workshop, the iron law of proportionality
subjects definite numbers of workmen to definite functions, in the
society outside the workshop, chance and caprice have full play in
distributing the producers and their means of production among the
various branches of industry. The different spheres of production, it
is true, constantly tend to an equilibrium: for, on the one hand, while
each producer of a commodity is bound to produce a use-value, to
satisfy a particular social want, and while the extent of these wants
differs quantitatively, still there exists an inner relation which
settles their proportions into a regular system, and that system one of
spontaneous growth; and, on the other hand, the law of the value of
commodities ultimately determines how much of its disposable
working-time society can expend on each particular class of
commodities. But this constant tendency to equilibrium, of the various
spheres of production, is exercised, only in the shape of a reaction
against the constant upsetting of this equilibrium. The "a priori"
system on which the division of labour, within the workshop, is
regularly carried out, becomes in the division of labour within the
society, an "a posteriori", nature-imposed necessity, controlling the
lawless caprice of the producers, and perceptible in the barometrical
fluctuations of the market-prices. Division of labour within the
workshop implies the undisputed authority of the capitalist over men,
that are but parts of a mechanism that belongs to him. The division of
labour within the society brings into contact independent
commodity-producers, who acknowledge no other authority but that of
competition, of the coercion exerted by the pressure of their mutual
interests; just as in the animal kingdom, the "bellum omnium contra
omnes"


 more or less preserves the conditions of existence of every species.
 The same bourgeois mind which praises division of labour in the
 workshop, life-long annexation of the labourer to a partial operation,
 and his complete subjection to capital, as being an organisation of
 labour that increases its productiveness that same bourgeois mind
 denounces with equal vigour every conscious attempt to socially
 control and regulate the process of production, as an inroad upon such
 sacred things as the rights of property, freedom and unrestricted play
 for the bent of the individual capitalist. It is very characteristic
 that the enthusiastic apologists of the factory system have nothing
 more damning to urge against a general organisation of the labour of
 society, than that it would turn all society into one immense factory.
 If, in a society with capitalist production, anarchy in the social
 division of labour and despotism in that of the workshop are mutual
 conditions the one of the other, we find, on the contrary, in those
 earlier forms of society in which the separation of trades has been
 spontaneously developed, then crystallised, and finally made permanent
 by law, on the one hand, a specimen of the organisation of the labour
 of society, in accordance with an approved and authoritative plan, and
 on the other, the entire exclusion of division of labour in the
 workshop, or at all events a mere dwarflike or sporadic and accidental
 development of the same.6
 
Those small and extremely ancient Indian communities, some of which
have continued down to this day, are based on possession in common of
the land, on the blending of agriculture and handicrafts, and on an
unalterable division of labour, which serves, whenever a new community
is started, as a plan and scheme ready cut and dried. Occupying areas
of from 100 up to several thousand acres, each forms a compact whole
producing all it requires. The chief part of the products is destined
for direct use by the community itself, and does not take the form of a
commodity. Hence, production here is independent of that division of
labour brought about, in Indian society as a whole, by means of the
exchange of commodities. It is the surplus alone that becomes a
commodity, and a portion of even that, not until it has reached the
hands of the State, into whose hands from time immemorial a certain
quantity of these products has found its way in the shape of rent in
kind. The constitution of these communities varies in different parts
of India. In those of the simplest form, the land is tilled in common,
and the produce divided among the members. At the same time, spinning
and weaving are carried on in each family as subsidiary industries.
Side by side with the masses thus occupied with one and the same work,
we find the 'chief inhabitant,' who is judge, police, and tax-gatherer
in one; the book-keeper, who keeps the accounts of the tillage and
registers everything relating thereto; another official, who prosecutes
criminals, protects strangers travelling through and escorts them to
the next village; the boundary man, who guards the boundaries against
neighbouring communities; the water-overseer, who distributes the water
from the common tanks for irrigation; the Brahmin, who conducts the
religious services; the schoolmaster, who on the sand teaches the
children reading and writing; the calendar-Brahmin, or astrologer, who
makes known the lucky or unlucky days for seed-time and harvest, and
for every other kind of agricultural work; a smith and a carpenter, who
make and repair all the agricultural implements; the potter, who makes
all the pottery of the village; the barber, the washerman, who washes
clothes, the silversmith, here and there the poet, who in some
communities replaces the silversmith, in others the schoolmaster. This
dozen of individuals is maintained at the expense of the whole
community. If the population increases, a new community is founded, on
the pattern of the old one, on unoccupied land. The whole mechanism
discloses a systematic division of labour; but a division like that in
manufactures is impossible, since the smith and the carpenter, &c.,
find an unchanging market, and at the most there occur, according to
the sizes of the villages, two or three of each, instead of one.7 The
law that regulates the division of labour in the community acts with
the irresistible authority of a law of Nature, at the same time that
each individual artificer, the smith, the carpenter, and so on,
conducts in his workshop all the operations of his handicraft in the
traditional way, but independently, and without recognising any
authority over him. The simplicity of the organisation for production
in these self-sufficing communities that constantly reproduce
themselves in the same form, and when accidentally destroyed, spring up
again on the spot and with the same name8 this simplicity supplies the
key to the secret of the unchangeableness of Asiatic societies, an
unchangeableness in such striking contrast with the constant
dissolution and refounding of Asiatic States, and the never-ceasing
changes of dynasty. The structure of the economic elements of society
remains untouched by the storm-clouds of the political sky.

The rules of the guilds, as I have said before, by limiting most
strictly the number of apprentices and journeymen that a single master
could employ, prevented him from becoming a capitalist. Moreover, he
could not employ his journeymen in many other handicrafts than the one
in which he was a master. The guilds zealously repelled every
encroachment by the capital of merchants, the only form of free capital
with which they came in contact. A merchant could buy every kind of
commodity, but labour as a commodity he could not buy. He existed only
on sufferance, as a dealer in the products of the handicrafts. If
circumstances called for a further division of labour, the existing
guilds split themselves up into varieties, or founded new guilds by the
side of the old ones; all this, however, without concentrating various
handicrafts in a single workshop. Hence, the guild organisation,
however much it may have contributed by separating, isolating, and
perfecting the handicrafts, to create the material conditions for the
existence of manufacture, excluded division of labour in the workshop.
On the whole, the labourer and his means of production remained closely
united, like the snail with its shell, and thus there was wanting the
principal basis of manufacture, the separation of the labourer from his
means of production, and the conversion of these means into capital.

While division of labour in society at large, whether such division be
brought about or not by exchange of commodities, is common to economic
formations of society the most diverse, division of labour in the
workshop, as practised by manufacture, is a special creation of the
capitalist mode of production alone.

=== Section 5: The Capitalistic Character of Manufacture == =

An increased number of labourers under the control of one capitalist is
the natural starting-point, as well of co-operation generally, as of
manufacture in particular. But the division of labour in manufacture
makes this increase in the number of workmen a technical necessity. The
minimum number that any given capitalist is bound to employ is here
prescribed by the previously established division of labour. On the
other hand, the advantages of further division are obtainable only by
adding to the number of workmen, and this can be done only by adding
multiples of the various detail groups. But an increase in the variable
component of the capital employed necessitates an increase in its
constant component, too, in the workshops, implements, &c., and, in
particular, in the raw material, the call for which grows quicker than
the number of workmen. The quantity of it consumed in a given time, by
a given amount of labour, increases in the same ratio as does the
productive power of that labour in consequence of its division. Hence,
it is a law, based on the very nature of manufacture, that the minimum
amount of capital, which is bound to be in the hands of each
capitalist, must keep increasing; in other words, that the
transformation into capital of the social means of production and
subsistence must keep extending.9

In manufacture, as well as in simple co-operation, the collective
working organism is a form of existence of capital. The mechanism that
is made up of numerous individual detail labourers belongs to the
capitalist. Hence, the productive power resulting from a combination of
labours appears to be the productive power of capital. Manufacture
proper not only subjects the previously independent workman to the
discipline and command of capital, but, in addition, creates a
hierarchic gradation of the workmen themselves. While simple
co-operation leaves the mode of working by the individual for the most
part unchanged, manufacture thoroughly revolutionises it, and seizes
labour-power by its very roots. It converts the labourer into a
crippled monstrosity, by forcing his detail dexterity at the expense of
a world of productive capabilities and instincts; just as in the States
of La Plata they butcher a whole beast for the sake of his hide or his
tallow. Not only is the detail work distributed to the different
individuals, but the individual himself is made the automatic motor of
a fractional operation,0 and the absurd fable of Menenius Agrippa,
which makes man a mere fragment of his own body, becomes realised.1 If,
at first, the workman sells his labour-power to capital, because the
material means of producing a commodity fail him, now his very
labour-power refuses its services unless it has been sold to capital.
Its functions can be exercised only in an environment that exists in
the workshop of the capitalist after the sale. By nature unfitted to
make anything independently, the manufacturing labourer develops
productive activity as a mere appendage of the capitalist's workshop.2
As the chosen people bore in their features the sign manual of Jehovah,
so division of labour brands the manufacturing workman as the property
of capital.

The knowledge, the judgement, and the will, which, though in ever so
small a degree, are practised by the independent peasant or
handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole art of
war consist in the exercise of his personal cunning these faculties are
now required only for the workshop as a whole. Intelligence in
production expands in one direction, because it vanishes in many
others. What is lost by the detail labourers, is concentrated in the
capital that employs them.3 It is a result of the division of labour in
manufactures, that the labourer is brought face to face with the
intellectual potencies of the material process of production, as the
property of another, and as a ruling power. This separation begins in
simple co-operation, where the capitalist represents to the single
workman, the oneness and the will of the associated labour. It is
developed in manufacture which cuts down the labourer into a detail
labourer. It is completed in modern industry, which makes science a
productive force distinct from labour and presses it into the service
of capital.4

In manufacture, in order to make the collective labourer, and through
him capital, rich in social productive power, each labourer must be
made poor in individual productive powers.

'Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition.
Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand
or the foot is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly,
prosper most where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop
may ... be considered as an engine, the parts of which are men.'5

As a matter of fact, some few manufacturers in the middle of the 18th
century preferred, for certain operations that were trade secrets, to
employ half-idiotic persons.6

'The understandings of the greater part of men,' says Adam Smith, 'are
necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. The man whose whole
life is spent in performing a few simple operations ... has no occasion
to exert his understanding... He generally becomes as stupid and
ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become.'

After describing the stupidity of the detail labourer he goes on:

'The uniformity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage
of his mind... It corrupts even the activity of his body and renders
him incapable of exerting his strength with vigour and perseverance in
any other employments than that to which he has been bred. His
dexterity at his own particular trade seems in this manner to be
acquired at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial
virtues. But in every improved and civilised society, this is the state
into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people,
must necessarily fall.'7

For preventing the complete deterioration of the great mass of the
people by division of labour, A. Smith recommends education of the
people by the State, but prudently, and in homeopathic doses. G.
Garnier, his French translator and commentator, who, under the first
French Empire, quite naturally developed into a senator, quite as
naturally opposes him on this point. Education of the masses, he urges,
violates the first law of the division of labour, and with it

'our whole social system would be proscribed.' "Like all other
divisions of labour,' he says, 'that between hand labour and head
labour 8 is more pronounced and decided in proportion as society (he
rightly uses this word, for capital, landed property and their State)
becomes richer. This division of labour, like every other, is an effect
of past, and a cause of future progress... ought the government then to
work in opposition to this division of labour, and to hinder its
natural course? Ought it to expend a part of the public money in the
attempt to confound and blend together two classes of labour, which are
striving after division and separation?'9

Some crippling of body and mind is inseparable even from division of
labour in society as a whole. Since, however, manufacture carries this
social separation of branches of labour much further, and also, by its
peculiar division, attacks the individual at the very roots of his
life0 , it is the first to afford the materials for, and to give a
start to, industrial pathology.

'To subdivide a man is to execute him, if he deserves the sentence, to
assassinate him if he does not... The subdivision of labour is the
assassination of a people.' 1


Co-operation based on division of labour, in other words, manufacture,
commences as a spontaneous formation. So soon as it attains some
consistence and extension, it becomes the recognised methodical and
systematic form of capitalist production. History shows how the
division of labour peculiar to manufacture, strictly so called,
acquires the best adapted form at first by experience, as it were
behind the backs of the actors, and then, like the guild handicrafts,
strives to hold fast that form when once found, and here and there
succeeds in keeping it for centuries. Any alteration in this form,
except in trivial matters, is solely owing to a revolution in the
instruments of labour. Modern manufacture wherever it arises I do not
here allude to modern industry based on machinery either finds the
disjecta membra poetae ready to hand, and only waiting to be collected
together, as is the case in the manufacture of clothes in large towns,
or it can easily apply the principle of division, simply by exclusively
assigning the various operations of a handicraft (such as book-binding)
to particular men. In such cases, a week's experience is enough to
determine the proportion between the numbers of the hands necessary for
the various functions.2

By decomposition of handicrafts, by specialisation of the instruments
of labour, by the formation of detail labourers, and by grouping and
combining the latter into a single mechanism, division of labour in
manufacture creates a qualitative gradation, and a quantitative
proportion in the social process of production; it consequently creates
a definite organisation of the labour of society, and thereby develops
at the same time new productive forces in the society. In its specific
capitalist form and under the given conditions, it could take no other
form than a capitalistic one manufacture is but a particular method of
begetting relative surplus value, or of augmenting at the expense of
the labourer the self-expansion of capital usually called social
wealth, 'Wealth of Nations,' &c. It increases the social productive
power of labour, not only for the benefit of the capitalist instead of
for that of the labourer, but it does this by crippling the individual
labourers. It creates new conditions for the lordship of capital over
labour. If, therefore, on the one hand, it presents itself historically
as a progress and as a necessary phase in the economic development of
society, on the other hand, it is a refined and civilised method of
exploitation.

Political Economy, which as an independent science, first sprang into
being during the period of manufacture, views the social division of
labour only from the standpoint of manufacture,3 and sees in it only
the means of producing more commodities with a given quantity of
labour, and, consequently, of cheapening commodities and hurrying on
the accumulation of capital. In most striking contrast with this
accentuation of quantity and exchange-value, is the attitude of the
writers of classical antiquity, who hold exclusively by quality and
use-value.4 In consequence of the separation of the social branches of
production, commodities are better made, the various bents and talents
of men select a suitable field,5 and without some restraint no
important results can be obtained anywhere.6 Hence both product and
producer are improved by division of labour. If the growth of the
quantity produced is occasionally mentioned, this is only done with
reference to the greater abundance of use-values. There is not a word
alluding to exchange-value or to the cheapening of commodities. This
aspect, from the standpoint of use-value alone, is taken as well by
Plato,7 who treats division of labour as the foundation on which the
division of society into classes is based, as by Xenophon8 , who with
characteristic bourgeois instinct, approaches more nearly to division
of labour within the workshop. Plato's Republic, in so far as division
of labour is treated in it, as the formative principle of the State, is
merely the Athenian idealisation of the Egyptian system of castes,
Egypt having served as the model of an industrial country to many of
his contemporaries also, amongst others to Isocrates,9 and it continued
to have this importance to the Greeks of the Roman Empire.0

During the manufacturing period proper, i.e., the period during which
manufacture is the predominant form taken by capitalist production,
many obstacles are opposed to the full development of the peculiar
tendencies of manufacture. Although manufacture creates, as we have
already seen, a simple separation of the labourers into skilled and
unskilled, simultaneously with their hierarchic arrangement in classes,
yet the number of the unskilled labourers, owing to the preponderating
influence of the skilled, remains very limited. Although it adapts the
detail operations to the various degrees of maturity, strength, and
development of the living instruments of labour, thus conducing to
exploitation of women and children, yet this tendency as a whole is
wrecked on the habits and the resistance of the male labourers.
Although the splitting up of handicrafts lowers the cost of forming the
workman, and thereby lowers his value, yet for the more difficult
detail work, a longer apprenticeship is necessary, and, even where it
would be superfluous, is jealously insisted upon by the workmen. In
England, for instance, we find the laws of apprenticeship, with their
seven years' probation, in full force down to the end of the
manufacturing period; and they are not thrown on one side till the
advent of Modern Industry. Since handicraft skill is the foundation of
manufacture, and since the mechanism of manufacture as a whole
possesses no framework, apart from the labourers themselves, capital is
constantly compelled to wrestle with the insubordination of the
workmen.

'By the infirmity of human nature,' says friend Ure, 'it happens that
the more skilful the workman, the more self-willed and intractable he
is apt to become, and of course the less fit a component of a
mechanical system in which ... he may do great damage to the whole'1


Hence throughout the whole manufacturing period there runs the
complaint of want of discipline among the workmen2 . And had we not the
testimony of contemporary writers, the simple facts, that during the
period between the 16th century and the epoch of Modern Industry,
capital failed to become the master of the whole disposable
working-time of the manufacturing labourers, that manufactures are
short-lived, and change their locality from one country to another with
the emigrating or immigrating workmen, these facts would speak volumes.
'Order must in one way or another be established,' exclaims in 1770 the
oft-cited author of the 'Essay on Trade and Commerce.' 'Order,'
re-echoes Dr. Andrew Ure 66 years later, 'Order' was wanting in
manufacture based on 'the scholastic dogma of division of labour,' and
'Arkwright created order.'

At the same time manufacture was unable, either to seize upon the
production of society to its full extent, or to revolutionise that
production to its very core. It towered up as an economic work of art,
on the broad foundation of the town handicrafts, and of the rural
domestic industries. At a given stage in its development, the narrow
technical basis on which manufacture rested, came into conflict with
requirements of production that were created by manufacture itself.

One of its most finished creations was the workshop for the production
of the instruments of labour themselves, including especially the
complicated mechanical apparatus then already employed.

A machine-factory, says Ure, 'displayed the division of labour in
manifold gradations the file, the drill, the lathe, having each its
different workman in the order of skill.' (P. 21.)

This workshop, the product of the division of labour in manufacture,
produced in its turn machines. It is they that sweep away the
handicraftsman's work as the regulating principle of social production.
Thus, on the one hand, the technical reason for the life-long
annexation of the workman to a detail function is removed. On the other
hand, the fetters that this same principle laid on the dominion of
capital, fall away.

== Chapter 15: Machinery and Modern Industry = =

=== Section 1 : The Development of Machinery == =

John Stuart Mill says in his 'Principles of Political Economy":

'It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have
lightened the day's toil of any human being.'

That is, however, by no means the aim of the capitalistic application
of machinery. Like every other increase in the productiveness of
labour, machinery is intended to cheapen commodities, and, by
shortening that portion of the working day, in which the labourer works
for himself, to lengthen the other portion that he gives, without an
equivalent, to the capitalist. In short, it is a means for producing
surplus value.

In manufacture, the revolution in the mode of production begins with
the labour-power, in modern industry it begins with the instruments of
labour. Our first inquiry then is, how the instruments of labour are
converted from tools into machines, or what is the difference between a
machine and the implements of a handicraft? We are only concerned here
with striking and general characteristics; for epochs in the history of
society are no more separated from each other by hard and fast lines of
demarcation, than are geological epochs.

Mathematicians and mechanicians, and in this they are followed by a few
English economists, call a tool a simple machine, and a machine a
complex tool. They see no essential difference between them, and even
give the name of machine to the simple mechanical powers, the lever,
the inclined plane, the screw, the wedge, &c. As a matter of fact,
every machine is a combination of those simple powers, no matter how
they may be disguised. From the economic standpoint this explanation is
worth nothing, because the historical element is wanting. Another
explanation of the difference between tool and machine is that in the
case of a tool, man is the motive power, while the motive power of a
machine is something different from man, as, for instance, an animal,
water, wind, and so on. According to this, a plough drawn by oxen,
which is a contrivance common to the most different epochs, would be a
machine, while Claussen's circular loom, which, worked by a single
labourer, weaves 96,000 picks per minute, would be a mere tool. Nay,
this very loom, though a tool when worked by hand, would, if worked by
steam, be a machine. And since the application of animal power is one
of man's earliest inventions, production by machinery would have
preceded production by handicrafts. When in 1735, John Wyatt brought
out his spinning machine, and began the industrial revolution of the
18th century, not a word did he say about an ass driving it instead of
a man, and yet this part fell to the ass. He described it as a machine
'to spin without fingers.'

All fully developed machinery consists of three essentially different
parts, the motor mechanism, the transmitting mechanism, and finally the
tool or working machine. The motor mechanism is that which puts the
whole in motion. It either generates its own motive power, like the
steam-engine, the caloric engine, the electromagnetic machine, &c., or
it receives its impulse from some already existing natural force, like
the water-wheel from a head of water, the wind-mill from wind, &c. The
transmitting mechanism, composed of fly-wheels, shafting, toothed
wheels, pullies, straps, ropes, bands, pinions, and gearing of the most
varied kinds, regulates the motion, changes its form. where necessary,
as for instance, from linear to circular, and divides and distributes
it among the working machines. These two first parts of the whole
mechanism are there, solely for putting the working machines in motion,
by means of which motion the subject of labour is seized upon and
modified as desired. The tool or working machine is that part of the
machinery with which the industrial revolution of the 18th century
started. And to this day it constantly serves as such a starting-point,
whenever a handicraft, or a manufacture, is turned into an industry
carried on by machinery.

On a closer examination of the working machine proper, we find in it,
as a general rule, though often, no doubt, under very altered forms,
the apparatus and tools used by the handicraftsman or manufacturing
workman; with this difference, that instead of being human implements,
they are the implements of a mechanism, or mechanical implements.
Either the entire machine is only a more or less altered mechanical
edition of the old handicraft tool, as, for instance, the power-loom,
or the working parts fitted in the frame of the machine are old
acquaintances, as spindles are in a mule, needles in a stocking-loom,
saws in a sawing-machine, and knives in a chopping machine. The
distinction between these tools and the body proper of the machine,
exists from their very birth; for they continue for the most part to be
produced by handicraft, or by manufacture, and are afterwards fitted
into the body of the machine, which is the product of machinery. The
machine proper is therefore a mechanism that, after being set in
motion, performs with its tools the same operations that were formerly
done by the workman with similar tools. Whether the motive power is
derived from man, or from some other machine, makes no difference in
this respect. From the moment that the tool proper is taken from man,
and fitted into a mechanism, a machine takes the place of a mere
implement. The difference strikes one at once, even in those cases
where man himself continues to be the prime mover. The number of
implements that he himself can use simultaneously, is limited by the
number of his own natural instruments of production, by the number of
his bodily organs. In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner
work two spinning-wheels, that is, to work simultaneously with both
hands and both feet. This was too difficult. Later, a treddle
spinning-wheel with two spindles was invented, but adepts in spinning,
who could spin two threads at once, were almost as scarce as two-headed
men. The Jenny, on the other hand, even at its very birth, spun with
12-18 spindles, and the stocking-loom knits with many thousand needles
at once. The number of tools that a machine can bring into play
simultaneously, is from the very first emancipated from the organic
limits that hedge in the tools of a handicraftsman.

In many manual implements the distinction between man as mere motive
power, and man as the workman or operator properly so called, is
brought into striking contrast. For instance, the foot is merely the
prime mover of the spinning-wheel, while the hand, working with the
spindle, and drawing and twisting, performs the real operation of
spinning. It is this last part of the handicraftsman's implement that
is first seized upon by the industrial revolution, leaving to the
workman, in addition to his new labour of watching the machine with his
eyes and correcting its mistakes with his hands, the merely mechanical
part of being the moving power. On the other hand, implements, in
regard to which man has always acted as a simple motive power, as, for
instance, by turning the crank of a mill, by pumping, by moving up and
down the arm of a bellows, by pounding with a mortar, &c., such
implements soon call for the application of animals, water and wind as
motive powers. Here and there, long before the period of manufacture,
and also, to some extent, during that period, these implements pass
over into machines, but without creating any revolution in the mode of
production. It becomes evident, in the period of modern industry, that
these implements, even under their form of manual tools, are already
machines. For instance, the pumps with which the Dutch, in 1836-7,
emptied the Lake of Harlem, were constructed on the principle of
ordinary pumps; the only difference being, that their pistons were
driven by cyclopean steam-engines, instead of by men. The common and
very imperfect bellows of the blacksmith is, in England, occasionally
converted into a blowing-engine, by connecting its arm with a
steam-engine. The steam-engine itself, such as it was at its invention,
during the manufacturing period at the close of the 17th century, and
such as it continued to be down to 1780, did not give rise to any
industrial revolution. It was, on the contrary, the invention of
machines that made a revolution in the form of steam-engines necessary.
As soon as man, instead of working with an implement on the subject of
his labour, becomes merely the motive power of an implement-machine, it
is a mere accident that motive power takes the disguise of human
muscle; and it may equally well take the form of wind, water or steam.
Of course, this does not prevent such a change of form from producing
great technical alterations in the mechanism that was originally
constructed to be driven by man alone. Now-a-days, all machines that
have their way to make, such as sewing-machines, bread-making machines,
&c., are, unless from their very nature their use on a small scale is
excluded, constructed to be driven both by human and by purely
mechanical motive power.

The machine, which is the starting-point of the industrial revolution,
supersedes the workman, who handles a single tool, by a mechanism
operating with a number of similar tools, and set in motion by a single
motive power, whatever the form of that power may be.0 Here we have the
machine, but only as an elementary factor of production by machinery.

Increase in the size of the machine, and in the number of its working
tools, calls for a more massive mechanism to drive it; and this
mechanism requires, in order to overcome its resistance, a mightier
moving power than that of man, apart from the fact that man is a very
imperfect instrument for producing uniform continued motion. But
assuming that he is acting simply as a motor, that a machine has taken
the place of his tool, it is evident that he can be replaced by natural
forces. Of all the great motors handed down from the manufacturing
period, horse-power is the worst, partly because a horse has a head of
his own, partly because he is costly, and the extent to which he is
applicable in factories is very restricted.1 Nevertheless the horse was
extensively used during the infancy of modern industry. This is proved,
as well by the complaints of contemporary agriculturists, as by the
term 'horse-power,' which has survived to this day as an expression for
mechanical force.

Wind was too inconstant and uncontrollable, and besides, in England,
the birthplace of modern industry, the use of water power preponderated
even during the manufacturing period. In the 17th century attempts had
already been made to turn two pairs of millstones with a single
water-wheel. But the increased size of the gearing was too much for the
water power, which had now become insufficient, and this was one of the
circumstances that led to a more accurate investigation of the laws of
friction. In the same way the irregularity caused by the motive power
in mills that were put in motion by pushing and pulling a lever, led to
the theory, and the application, of the fly-wheel, which afterwards
plays so important a part in modern industry.2 In this way, during the
manufacturing period, were developed the first scientific and technical
elements of Modern Mechanical Industry. Arkwright's throstle spinning
mill was from the very first turned by water. But for all that, the use
of water, as the predominant motive power, was beset with difficulties.
It could not be increased at will, it failed at certain seasons of the
year, and, above all, it was essentially local.3 Not till the invention
of Watt's second and so-called double-acting steam-engine, was a prime
mover found, that begot its own force by the consumption of coal and
water, whose power was entirely under man's control, that was mobile
and a means of locomotion, that was urban and not, like the waterwheel,
rural, that permitted production to be concentrated in towns instead
of, like the water-wheels, being scattered up and down the country,4
that was of universal technical application, and, relatively speaking,
little affected in its choice of residence by local circumstances. The
greatness of Watt's genius showed itself in the specification of the
patent that he took out in April, 1784. In that specification his
steam-engine is described, not as an invention for a specific purpose,
but as an agent universally applicable in Mechanical Industry. In it he
points out applications, many of which, as for instance, the
steam-hammer, were not introduced till half a century later.
Nevertheless he doubted the use of steam-engines in navigation. His
successors, Boulton and Watt, sent to the exhibition of 1851
steam-engines of colossal size for ocean steamers.

As soon as tools had been converted from being manual implements of man
into implements of a mechanical apparatus, of a machine, the motive
mechanism also acquired an independent form, entirely emancipated from
the restraints of human strength. Thereupon the individual machine,
that we have hitherto been considering, sinks into a mere factor in
production by machinery. One motive mechanism was now able to drive
many machines at once. The motive mechanism grows with the number of
the machines that are turned simultaneously, and the transmitting
mechanism becomes a wide-spreading apparatus.

We now proceed to distinguish the co-operation of a number of machines
of one kind from a complex system of machinery.

In the one case, the product is entirely made by a single machine,
which performs all the various operations previously done by one
handicraftsman with his tool; as, for instance, by a weaver with his
loom; or by several handicraftsman successively, either separately or
as members of a system of Manufacture.5 For example, in the manufacture
of envelopes, one man folded the paper with the folder, another laid on
the gum, a third turned the flap over, on which the device is
impressed, a fourth embossed the device, and so on; and for each of
these operations the envelope had to change hands. One single envelope
machine now performs all these operations at once, and makes more than
3,000 envelopes in an hour. In the London exhibition of 1862, there was
an American machine for making paper cornets. It cut the paper, pasted,
folded, and finished 300 in a minute. Here, the whole process, which,
when carried on as Manufacture, was split up into, and carried out by,
a series of operations, is completed by a single machine, working a
combination of various tools. Now, whether such a machine be merely a
reproduction of a complicated manual implement, or a combination of
various simple implements specialised by Manufacture, in either case,
in the factory, "i.e"., in the workshop in which machinery alone is
used, we meet again with simple co-operation; and, leaving the workman
out of consideration for the moment, this co-operation presents itself
to us, in the first instance, as the conglomeration in one place of
similar and simultaneously acting machines. Thus, a weaving factory is
constituted of a number of power-looms, working side by side, and a
sewing factory of a number of sewing-machines all in the same building.
But there is here a technical oneness in the whole system, owing to all
the machines receiving their impulse simultaneously, and in an equal
degree, from the pulsations of the common prime mover, by the
intermediary of the transmitting mechanism; and this mechanism, to a
certain extent, is also common to them all, since only particular
ramifications of it branch off to each machine. Just as a number of
tools, then, form the organs of a machine, so a number of machines of
one kind constitute the organs of the motive mechanism.

A real machinery system, however, does not take the place of these
independent machines, until the subject of labour goes through a
connected series of detail processes, that are carried out by a chain
of machines of various kinds, the one supplementing the other. Here we
have again the co-operation by division of labour that characterises
Manufacture; only now, it is a combination of detail machines. The
special tools of the various detail workmen, such as those of the
beaters, cambers, spinners, &c., in the woollen manufacture, are now
transformed into the tools of specialised machines, each machine
constituting a special organ, with a special function, in the system.
In those branches of industry in which the machinery system is first
introduced, Manufacture itself furnishes, in a general way, the natural
basis for the division, and consequent organisation, of the process of
production.6 Nevertheless an essential difference at once manifests
itself. In Manufacture it is the workmen who, with their manual
implements, must, either singly or in groups, carry on each particular
detail process. If, on the one hand, the workman becomes adapted to the
process, on the other, the process was previously made suitable to the
workman. This subjective principle of the division of labour no longer
exists in production by machinery. Here, the process as a whole is
examined objectively, in itself, that is to say, without regard to the
question of its execution by human hands, it is analysed into its
constituent phases; and the problem, how to execute each detail
process, and bind them all into a whole, is solved by the aid of
machines, chemistry, &c.7 But, of course, in this case also, theory
must be perfected by accumulated experience on a large scale. Each
detail machine supplies raw material to the machine next in order; and
since they are all working at the same time, the product is always
going through the various stages of its fabrication, and is also
constantly in a state of transition, from one phase to another. Just as
in Manufacture, the direct co-operation of the detail labourers
establishes a numerical proportion between the special groups, so in an
organised system of machinery, where one detail machine is constantly
kept employed by another, a fixed relation is established between their
numbers, their size, and their speed. The collective machine, now an
organised system of various kinds of single machines, and of groups of
single machines, becomes more and more perfect, the more the process as
a whole becomes a continuous one, i.e., the less the raw material is
interrupted in its passage from its first phase to its last; in other
words, the more its passage from one phase to another is effected, not
by the hand of man, but by the machinery itself. In Manufacture the
isolation of each detail process is a condition imposed by the nature
of division of labour, but in the fully developed factory the
continuity of those processes is, on the contrary, imperative.

A system of machinery, whether it reposes on the mere co-operation of
similar machines, as in weaving, or on a combination of different
machines, as in spinning, constitutes in itself a huge automaton,
whenever it is driven by a self-acting prime mover. But although the
factory as a whole be driven by its steam-engine, yet either some of
the individual machines may require the aid of the workman for some of
their movements (such aid was necessary for the running in of the mule
carriage, before the invention of the self-acting mule, and is still
necessary in fine-spinning mills); or, to enable a machine to do its
work, certain parts of it may require to be handled by the workman like
a manual tool; this was the case in machine-makers' workshops, before
the conversion of the slide rest into a self-actor. As soon as a
machine executes, without man's help, all the movements requisite to
elaborate the raw material, needing only attendance from him, we have
an automatic system of machinery, and one that is susceptible of
constant improvement in its details. Such improvements as the apparatus
that stops a drawing frame, whenever a sliver breaks, and the
self-acting stop, that stops the power-loom so soon as the shuttle
bobbin is emptied of weft, are quite modern inventions. As an example,
both of continuity of production, and of the carrying out of the
automatic principle, we may take a modern paper mill. In the paper
industry generally, we may advantageously study in detail not only the
distinctions between modes of production based on different means of
production, but also the connexion of the social conditions of
production with those modes: for the old German paper-making furnishes
us with a sample of handicraft production; that of Holland in the 17th
and of France in the 18th century with a sample of manufacturing in the
strict sense; and that of modern England with a sample of automatic
fabrication of this article. Besides these, there still exist, in India
and China, two distinct antique Asiatic forms of the same industry.

An organised system of machines, to which motion is communicated by the
transmitting mechanism from a central automaton, is the most developed
form of production by machinery. Here we have, in the place of the
isolated machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole
factories, and whose demon power, at first veiled under the slow and
measured motions of his giant limbs, at length breaks out into the fast
and furious whirl of his countless working organs.

There were mules and steam-engines before there were any labourers,
whose exclusive occupation it was to make mules and steam-engines; just
as men wore clothes before there were such people as tailors. The
inventions of Vaucanson, Arkwright, Watt, and others, were, however,
practicable, only because those inventors found, ready to hand, a
considerable number of skilled mechanical workmen, placed at their
disposal by the manufacturing period. Some of these workmen were
independent handicraftsman of various trades, others were grouped
together in manufactures, in which, as before-mentioned, division of
labour was strictly carried out. As inventions increased in number, and
the demand for the newly discovered machines grew larger, the
machine-making industry split up, more and more, into numerous
independent branches, and division of labour in these manufactures was
more and more developed. Here, then, we see in Manufacture the
immediate technical foundation of modern industry. Manufacture produced
the machinery, by means of which modern industry abolished the
handicraft and manufacturing systems in those spheres of production
that it first seized upon. The factory system was therefore raised, in
the natural course of things, on an inadequate foundation. When the
system attained to a certain degree of development, it had to root up
this ready-made foundation, which in the meantime had been elaborated
on the old lines, and to build up for itself a basis that should
correspond to its methods of production. Just as the individual machine
retains a dwarfish character, so long as it is worked by the power of
man alone, and just as no system of machinery could be properly
developed before the steam-engine took the place of the earlier motive
powers, animals, wind, and even water; so, too, modern industry was
crippled in its complete development, so long as its characteristic
instrument of production, the machine, owed its existence to personal
strength and personal skill, and depended on the muscular development,
the keenness of sight, and the cunning of hand, with which the detail
workmen in manufactures, arid the manual labourers in handicrafts,
wielded their dwarfish implements. Thus, apart from the dearness of the
machines made in this way, a circumstance that is ever present to the
mind of the capitalist, the expansion of industries carried on by means
of machinery, and the invasion by machinery of fresh branches of
production, were dependent on the growth of a class of workmen, who,
owing to the almost artistic nature of their employment, could increase
their numbers only gradually, and not by leaps and bounds. But besides
this, at a certain stage of its development, modern industry became
technologically incompatible with the basis furnished for it by
handicraft and Manufacture. The increasing size of the prime movers, of
the transmitting mechanism, and of the machines proper, the greater
complication, multiformity and regularity of the details of these
machines, as they more and more departed from the model of those
originally made by manual labour, and acquired a form, untrammelled
except by the conditions under which they worked,8 the perfecting of
the automatic system, and the use, every day more unavoidable, of a
more refractory material, such as iron instead of wood-the solution of
all these problems, which sprang up by the force of circumstances,
everywhere met with a stumbling-block in the personal restrictions,
which even the collective labourer of Manufacture could not break
through, except to a limited extent. Such machines as the modern
hydraulic press, the modern power-loom, and the modern carding engine,
could never have been furnished by Manufacture.

A radical change in the mode of production in one sphere of industry
involves a similar change in other spheres. This happens at first in
such branches of industry as are connected together by being separate
phases of a process, and yet are isolated by the social division of
labour, in such a way, that each of them produces an independent
commodity. Thus spinning by machinery made weaving by machinery a
necessity, and both together made the mechanical and chemical
revolution that took place in bleaching, printing, and dyeing,
imperative. So too, on the other hand, the revolution in
cotton-spinning called forth the invention of the gin, for separating
the seeds from the cotton fibre; it was only by means of this
invention, that the production of cotton became possible on the
enormous scale at present required.9 But more especially, the
revolution in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made
necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process
of production, i.e., in the means of communication and of transport. In
a society whose pivot, to use an expression of Fourier, was agriculture
on a small scale, with its subsidiary domestic industries, and the
urban handicrafts, the means of communication and transport were so
utterly inadequate to the productive requirements of the manufacturing
period, with its extended division of social labour, its concentration
of the instruments of labour, and of the workmen, and its colonial
markets, that they became in fact revolutionised. In the same way the
means of communication and transport handed down from the manufacturing
period soon became unbearable trammels on modern industry, with its
feverish haste of production, its enormous extent, its constant
flinging of capital and labour from one sphere of production into
another, and its newly-created connexions with the markets of the whole
world. Hence, apart from the radical changes introduced in the
construction of sailing vessels, the means of communication and
transport became gradually adapted to the modes of production of
mechanical industry, by the creation of a system of river steamers,
railways, ocean steamers, and telegraphs. But the huge masses of iron
that had now to be forged, to be welded, to be cut, to be bored, and to
be shaped, demanded, on their part, cyclopean machines, for the
construction of which the methods of the manufacturing period were
utterly inadequate.

modern industry had therefore itself to take in hand the machine, its
characteristic instrument of production, and to construct machines by
machines. It was not till it did this, that it built up for itself a
fitting technical foundation, and stood on its own feet. Machinery,
simultaneously with the increasing use of it, in the first decades of
this century, appropriated, by degrees, the fabrication of machines
proper. But it was only during the decade preceding 1866, that the
construction of railways and ocean steamers on a stupendous scale
called into existence the cyclopean machines now employed in the
construction of prime movers.

The most essential condition to the production of machines by machines
was a prime mover capable of exerting any amount of force, and yet
under perfect control. Such a condition was already supplied by the
steam-engine. But at the same time it was necessary to produce the
geometrically accurate straight lines, planes, circles, cylinders,
cones, and spheres, required in the detail parts of the machines. This
problem Henry Maudsley solved in the first decade of this century by
the invention of the slide rest, a tool that was soon made automatic,
and in a modified form was applied to other constructive machines
besides the lathe, for which it was originally intended. This
mechanical appliance replaces, not some particular tool, but the hand
itself, which produces a given form by holding and guiding the cutting
tool along the iron or other material operated upon. Thus it became
possible to produce the forms of the individual parts of machinery

'with a degree of ease, accuracy, and speed, that no accumulated
experience of the hand of the most skilled workman could give.'0

If we now fix our attention on that portion of the machinery employed
in the construction of machines, which constitutes the operating tool,
we find the manual implements re-appearing, but on a cyclopean scale.
The operating part of the boring machine is an immense drill driven by
a steam-engine; without this machine, on the other hand, the cylinders
of large steam-engines and of hydraulic presses could not be made. The
mechanical lathe is only a cyclopean reproduction of the ordinary
foot-lathe; the planing machine, an iron carpenter, that works on iron
with the same tools that the human carpenter employs on wood; the
instrument that, on the London wharves, cuts the veneers, is a gigantic
razor; the tool of the shearing machine, which shears iron as easily as
a tailor's scissors cut cloth, is a monster pair of scissors; and the
steam-hammer works with an ordinary hammer head, but of such a weight
that not Thor himself could wield it.1 These steam-hammers are an
invention of Nasmyth, and there is one that weighs over 6 tons and
strikes with a vertical fall of 7 feet, on an anvil weighing 36 tons.
It is mere child's-play for it to crush a block of granite into powder,
yet it is no less capable of driving, with a succession of light taps,
a nail into a piece of soft wood.2


The implements of labour, in the form of machinery, necessitate the
substitution of natural forces for human force, and the conscious
application of science, instead of rule of thumb. In Manufacture, the
organisation of the social labour-process is purely subjective; it is a
combination of detail labourers; in its machinery system, modern
industry has a productive organism that is purely objective, in which
the labourer becomes a mere appendage to an already existing material
condition of production. In simple co-operation, and even in that
founded on division of labour, the suppression of the isolated, by the
collective, workman still appears to be more or less accidental.
Machinery, with a few exceptions to be mentioned later, operates only
by means of associated labour, or labour in common. Hence the
co-operative character of the labour-process is, in the latter case, a
technical necessity dictated by the instrument of labour itself.

=== Section 2: The Value Transferred by Machinery to the Product == =

We saw that the productive forces resulting from co-operation and
division of labour cost capital nothing. They are natural forces of
social labour. So also physical forces, like steam, water, &c., when
appropriated to productive processes, cost nothing. But just as a man
requires lungs to breathe with, so he requires something that is work
of man's hand, in order to consume physical forces productively. A
water-wheel is necessary to exploit the force of water, and a
steam-engine to exploit the elasticity of steam. Once discovered, the
law of the deviation of the magnetic needle in the field of an electric
current, or the law of the magnetisation of iron, around which an
electric current circulates, cost never a penny.3 But the exploitation
of these laws for the purposes of telegraphy, &c., necessitates a
costly and extensive apparatus. The tool, as we have seen, is not
exterminated by the machine. From being a dwarf implement of the human
organism, it expands and multiplies into the implement of a mechanism
created by man. Capital now sets the labourer to work, not with a
manual tool, but with a machine which itself handles the tools.
Although, therefore, it is clear at the first glance that, by
incorporating both stupendous physical forces, and the natural
sciences, with the process of production, modern industry raises the
productiveness of labour to an extraordinary degree, it is by no means
equally clear, that this increased productive force is not, on the
other hand, purchased by an increased expenditure of labour. Machinery,
like every other component of constant capital, creates no new value,
but yields up its own value to the product that it serves to beget. In
so far as the machine has value, and, in consequence, parts with value
to the product, it forms an element in the value of that product.
Instead of being cheapened, the product is made dearer in proportion to
the value of the machine. And it is clear as noon-day, that machines
and systems of machinery, the characteristic instruments of labour of
Modern Industry, are incomparably more loaded with value than the
implements used in handicrafts and manufactures.

In the first place, it must be observed that the machinery, while
always entering as a whole into the labour-process, enters into the
value-begetting process only by bits. It never adds more value than it
loses, on an average, by wear and tear. Hence there is a great
difference between the value of a machine, and the value transferred in
a given time by that machine to the product. The longer the life of the
machine in the labour-process, the greater is that difference. It is
true, no doubt, as we have already seen, that every instrument of
labour enters as a whole into the labour-process, and only piece-meal,
proportionally to its average daily loss by wear and tear, into the
value-begetting process. But this difference between the instrument as
a whole and its daily wear and tear, is much greater in a machine than
in a tool, because the machine, being made from more durable material,
has a longer life; because its employment, being regulated by strictly
scientific laws, allows of greater economy in the wear and tear of its
parts, and in the materials it consumes; and lastly, because its field
of production is incomparably larger than that of a tool. After making
allowance, both in the case of the machine and of the tool, for their
average daily cost, that is for the value they transmit to the product
by their average daily wear and tear, and for their consumption of
auxiliary substance, such as oil, coal, and so on, they each do their
work gratuitously, just like the forces furnished by Nature without the
help of man. The greater the productive power of the machinery compared
with that of the tool, the greater is the extent of its gratuitous
service compared with that of the tool. In modern industry man
succeeded for the first time in making the product of his past labour
work on a large scale gratuitously, like the forces of Nature.4


In treating of Co-operation and Manufacture, it was shown that certain
general factors of production, such as buildings, are, in comparison
with the scattered means of production of the isolated workman,
economised by being consumed in common, and that they therefore make
the product cheaper. In a system of machinery, not only is the
framework of the machine consumed in common by its numerous operating
implements, but the prime mover, together with a part of the
transmitting mechanism, is consumed in common by the numerous operative
machines.

Given the difference between the value of the machinery, and the value
transferred by it in a day to the product, the extent to which this
latter value makes the product dearer, depends in the first instance,
upon the size of the product; so to say, upon its area. Mr. Baynes, of
Blackburn, in a lecture published in 1858, estimates that

'each real mechanical horse-power5 will drive 450 self-acting mule
spindles, with preparation, or 200 throstle spindles, or 15 looms for
40 inch cloth with the appliances for warping, sizing, &c.'

In the first case, it is the day's produce of 450 mule spindles, in the
second, of 200 throstle spindles, in the third, of 15 power-looms, over
which the daily cost of one horse-power, and the wear and tear of the
machinery set in motion by that power, are spread; so that only a very
minute value is transferred by such wear and tear to a pound of yarn or
a yard of cloth. The same is the case with the steam-hammer mentioned
above. Since its daily wear and tear, its coal-consumption, &c., are
spread over the stupendous masses of iron hammered by it in a day, only
a small value is added to a hundred weight of iron; but that value
would be very great, if the cyclopean instrument were employed in
driving in nails.

Given a machine's capacity for work, that is, the number of its
operating tools, or, where it is a question of force, their mass, the
amount of its product will depend on the velocity of its working parts,
on the speed, for instance, of the spindles, or on the number of blows
given by the hammer in a minute. Many of these colossal hammers strike
seventy times in a minute, and Ryder's patent machine for forging
spindles with small hammers gives as many as 700 strokes per minute.

Given the rate at which machinery transfers its value to the product,
the amount of value so transferred depends on the total value of the
machinery.6 The less labour it contains, the less value it imparts to
the product. The less value it gives up, so much the more productive it
is, and so much the more its services approximate to those of natural
forces. But the production of machinery by machinery lessens its value
relatively to its extension and efficacy.

An analysis and comparison of the prices of commodities produced by
handicrafts or manufactures, and of the prices of the same commodities
produced by machinery, shows generally, that, in the product of
machinery, the value due to the instruments of labour increases
relatively, but decreases absolutely. In other words, its absolute
amount decreases, but its amount, relatively to the total value of the
product, of a pound of yarn, for instance, increases.7

It is evident that whenever it costs as much labour to produce a
machine as is saved by the employment of that machine, there is nothing
but a transposition of labour; consequently the total labour required
to produce a commodity is not lessened or the productiveness of labour
is not increased. It is clear, however, that the difference between the
labour a machine costs, and the labour it saves, in other words, that
the degree of its productiveness does not depend on the difference
between its own value and the value of the implement it replaces. As
long as the labour spent on a machine, and consequently the portion of
its value added to the product, remains smaller than the value added by
the workman to the product with his tool, there is always a difference
of labour saved in favour of the machine. The productiveness of a
machine is therefore measured by the human labour-power it replaces.
According to Mr. Baynes, 2 operatives are required for the 450 mule
spindles, inclusive of preparation machinery,8 that are driven by
one-horse power; each self-acting mule spindle, working ten hours,
produces 13 ounces of yarn (average number of thickness); consequently
2 1/2 operatives spin weekly 365 5/8 lbs. of yarn. Hence, leaving waste
on one side, 366 lbs. of cotton absorb, during their conversion into
yarn, only 150 hours' labour, or fifteen days' labour of ten hours
each. But with a spinning-wheel, supposing the hand-spinner to produce
thirteen ounces of yarn in sixty hours, the same weight of cotton would
absorb 2,700 days' labour of ten hours each, or 27,000 hours' labour.9
Where blockprinting, the old method of printing calico by hand, has
been superseded by machine printing, a single machine prints, with the
aid of one man or boy, as much calico of four colours in one hour, as
it formerly took 200 men to do.0 Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton
gin in 1793, the separation of the seed from a pound of cotton cost an
average day's labour. By means of his invention one negress was enabled
to clean 100 lbs. daily; and since then, the efficacy of the gin has
been considerably increased. A pound of cotton wool, previously costing
50 cents to produce, included after that invention more unpaid labour,
and was consequently sold with greater profit, at 10 cents. In India
they employ for separating the wool from the seed, an instrument, half
machine, half tool, called a churka; with this one man and a woman can
clean 28 lbs. daily. With the churka invented some years ago by Dr.
Forbes, one man and a boy produce 250 lbs. daily. If oxen, steam, or
water, be used for driving it, only a few boys and girls as feeders are
required. Sixteen of these machines driven by oxen do as much work in a
day as formerly 750 people did on an average.1

As already stated, a steam-plough does as much work in one hour at a
cost of three-pence, as 66 men at a cost of 15 shillings. I return to
this example in order to clear up an erroneous notion. The 15 shillings
are by no means the expression in money of all the labour expended in
one hour by the 66 men. If the ratio of surplus labour to necessary
labour were 100%, these 66 men would produce in one hour a value of
30 shillings, although their wages, 15 shillings, represent only their
labour for half an hour. Suppose, then, a machine cost as much as the
wages for a year of the 150 men it displaces, say Pounds 3,000; this
Pounds 3,000 is by no means the expression in money of the labour added
to the object produced by these 150 men before the introduction of the
machine, but only of that portion of their year's labour which was
expended for themselves and represented by their wages. On the other
hand, the Pounds 3,000, the money-value of the machine, expresses all
the labour expended on its production, no matter in what proportion
this labour constitutes wages for the workman, and surplus value for
the capitalist. Therefore, though a machine cost as much as the
labour-power displaced by it costs, yet the labour materialised in it
is even then much less than the living labour it replaces. 2


The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapening the
product, is limited in this way, that less labour must be expended in
producing the machinery than is displaced by the employment of that
machinery, For the capitalist, however, this use is still more limited.
Instead of paying for the labour, he only pays the value of the
labour-power employed; therefore, the limit to his using a machine is
fixed by the difference between the value of the machine and the value
of the labour-power replaced by it. Since the division of the day's
work into necessary and surplus labour differs in different countries,
and even in the same country at different periods, or in different
branches of industry; and further, since the actual wage of the
labourer at one time sinks below the value of his labour-power, at
another rises above it, it is possible for the difference between the
price of the machinery and the price of the labour-power replaced by
that machinery to vary very much, although the difference between the
quantity of labour requisite to produce the machine and the total
quantity replaced by it, remain constant.3 But it is the former
difference alone that determines the cost, to the capitalist, of
producing a commodity, and, through the pressure of competition,
influences his action. Hence the invention now-a-days of machines in
England that are employed only in North America; just as in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, machines were invented in Germany
to be used only in Holland, and just as many a French invention of the
eighteenth century was exploited in England alone. In the older
countries, machinery, when employed in some branches of industry,
creates such a redundancy of labour in other branches that in these
latter the fall of wages below the value of labour-power impedes the
use of machinery, and, from the standpoint of the capitalist, whose
profit comes, not from a diminution of the labour employed, but of the
labour paid for, renders that use superfluous and often impossible. In
some branches of the woollen manufacture in England the employment of
children has during recent years been considerably diminished, and in
some cases has been entirely abolished. Why? Because the Factory Acts
made two sets of children necessary, one working six hours, the other
four, or each working five hours. But the parents refused to sell the
'half-timers' cheaper than the 'full-timers.' Hence the substitution of
machinery for the 'half-timers.'4 Before the labour of women and of
children under 10 years of age was forbidden in mines, capitalists
considered the employment of naked women and girls, often in company
with men, so far sanctioned by their moral code, and especially by
their ledgers, that it was only after the passing of the Act that they
had recourse to machinery. The Yankees have invented a stone-breaking
machine. The English do not make use of it, because the 'wretch' 5 who
does this work gets paid for such a small portion of his labour, that
machinery would increase the cost of production to the capitalist.6 In
England women are still occasionally used instead of horses for hauling
canal boats7 , because the labour required to produce horses and
machines is an accurately known quantity, while that required to
maintain the women of the surplus-population is below all calculation.
Hence nowhere do we find a more shameful squandering of human
labour-power for the most despicable purposes than in England, the land
of machinery.

=== Section 3: The Proximate Effects of Machinery on the Workman == =

The starting-point of modern industry is, as we have shown, the
revolution in the instruments of labour, and this revolution attains
its most highly developed form in the organised system of machinery in
a factory. Before we inquire how human material is incorporated with
this objective organism, let us consider some general effects of this
revolution on the labourer himself.

==== A. Appropriation of Supplementary Labour-Power by Capital. The
Employment of Women and Children === =

In so far as machinery dispenses with muscular power, it becomes a
means of employing labourers of slight muscular strength, and those
whose bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the
more supple. The labour of women and children was, therefore, the first
thing sought for by capitalists who used machinery. That mighty
substitute for labour and labourers was forthwith changed into a means
for increasing the number of wage-labourers by enrolling, under the
direct sway of capital, every member of the workman's family, without
distinction of age or sex. Compulsory work for the capitalist usurped
the place, not only of the children's play, but also of free labour at
home within moderate limits for the support of the family.8

The value of labour-power was determined, not only by the labour-time
necessary to maintain the individual adult labourer, but also by that
necessary to maintain his family. Machinery, by throwing every member
of that family on to the labour-market, spreads the value of the man's
labour-power over his whole family. It thus depreciates his
labour-power. To purchase the labour-power of a family of four workers
may, perhaps, cost more than it formerly did to purchase the
labour-power of the head of the family, but, in return, four days'
labour takes the place of one, and their price falls in proportion to
the excess of the surplus labour of four over the surplus labour of
one. In order that the family may live, four people must now, not only
labour, but expend surplus labour for the capitalist. Thus we see, that
machinery, while augmenting the human material that forms the principal
object of capital's exploiting power,9 at the same time raises the
degree of exploitation.

Machinery also revolutionises out and out the contract between the
labourer and the capitalist, which formally fixes their mutual
relations. Taking the exchange of commodities as our basis, our first
assumption was that capitalist and labourer met as free persons, as
independent owners of commodities; the one possessing money and means
of production, the other labour-power. But now the capitalist buys
children and young persons under age. Previously, the workman sold his
own labour-power, which he disposed of nominally as a free agent. Now
he sells wife and child. He has become a slave-dealer.0 The demand for
children's labour often resembles in form the inquiries for negro
slaves, such as were formerly to be read among the advertisements in
American journals.

'My attention,' says an English factory inspector, 'was drawn to an
advertisement in the local paper of one of the most important
manufacturing towns of my district, of which the following is a copy:
Wanted, 12 to 20 young persons, not younger than what can pass for 13
years. Wages, 4 shillings a week. Apply &c.' 1


The phrase 'what can pass for 13 years,' has reference to the fact,
that by the Factory Act, children under 13 years may work only 6 hours.
A surgeon officially appointed must certify their age. The
manufacturer, therefore, asks for children who look as if they we're
already 13 years old. The decrease, often by leaps and bounds in the
number of children under 13 years employed in factories, a decrease
that is shown in an astonishing manner by the English statistics of the
last 20 years, was for the most part, according to the evidence of the
factory inspectors themselves, the work of the certifying surgeons, who
overstated the age of the children, agreeably to the capitalist's greed
for exploitation, and the sordid trafficking needs of the parents. In
the notorious district of Bethnal Green, a public market is held every
Monday and Tuesday morning, where children of both sexes from 9 years
of age upwards, hire themselves out to the silk manufacturers. "The
usual terms are 1s. 8d. a week (this belongs to the parents) and '2d.
for myself and tea.' The contract is binding only for the week. The
scene and language while this market is going on are quite
disgraceful.' 2 It has also occurred in England, that women have taken
'children from the workhouse and let any one have them out for 2s. 6d.
a week.'3 In spite of legislation, the number of boys sold in Great
Britain by their parents to act as live chimney-sweeping machines
(although there exist plenty of machines to replace them) exceeds
2,000.4 The revolution effected by machinery in the juridical relations
between the buyer and the seller of labour-power, causing the
transaction as a whole to lose the appearance of a contract between
free persons, afforded the English Parliament an excuse, founded on
juridical principles, for the interference of the state with factories.
Whenever the law limits the labour of children to 6 hours in industries
not before interfered with, the complaints of the manufacturers are
always renewed. They allege that numbers of the parents withdraw their
children from the industry brought under the Act, in order to sell them
where 'freedom of labour' still rules, i.e., where children under 13
years are compelled to work like grown-up people, and therefore can be
got rid of at a higher price. But since capital is by nature a
leveller, since it exacts in every sphere of production equality in the
conditions of the exploitation of labour, the limitation by law of
children's labour, in one branch of industry, becomes the cause of its
limitation in others.

We have already alluded to the physical deterioration as well of the
children and young-persons as of the women, whom machinery, first
directly in the factories that shoot up on its basis, and then
indirectly in all the remaining branches of industry, subjects to the
exploitation of capital. In this place, therefore, we dwell only on one
point, the enormous mortality, during the first few years of their
life, of the children of the operatives. In sixteen of the registration
districts into which England is divided, there are, for every 100,000
children alive under the age of one year, only 9,000 deaths in a year
on an average (in one district only 7,047); in 24 districts the deaths
are over 10,000, but under 11,000; in 39 districts, over 11,000, but
under 12,000; in 48 districts over 12,000, but under 13,000; in 22
districts over 20,000; in 25 districts over 21,000; in 17 over 22,000;
in 11 over 23,000; in Hoo, Wolverhampton, Ashton-under-Lyne, and
Preston, over 24,000; in Nottingham, Stockport, and Bradford, over
25,000; in Wisbeach, 16,000; and in Manchester, 26,125.5 As was shown
by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the high death-rates
are, apart from local causes, principally due to the employment of the
mothers away from their homes, and to the neglect and maltreatment,
consequent on her absence, such as, amongst others, insufficient
nourishment, unsuitable food, and dosing with opiates; besides this,
there arises an unnatural estrangement between mother and child, and as
a consequence intentional starving and poisoning of the children.6 In
those agricultural districts, 'where a minimum in the employment of
women exists, the death-rate is on the other hand very low.' 7 The
Inquiry Commission of 1861 led, however, to the unexpected result, that
in some purely agricultural districts bordering on the North Sea, the
death-rate of children under one year old almost equalled that of the
worst factory districts. Dr. Julian Hunter was therefore commissioned
to investigate this phenomenon on the spot. His report is incorporated
with the 'Sixth Report on Public Health.'8 Up to that time it was
supposed, that the children were decimated by malaria, and other
diseases peculiar to low-lying and marshy districts. But the inquiry
showed the very opposite, namely, that the same cause which drove away
malaria, the conversion of the land, from a morass in winter and a
scanty pasture in summer, into fruitful corn land, created the
exceptional death-rate of the infants.9 The 70 medical men, whom Dr.
Hunter examined in that district, were 'wonderfully in accord' on this
point. In fact, the revolution in the mode of cultivation had led to
the introduction of the industrial system.

Married women, who work in gangs along with boys and girls, are, for a
stipulated sum of money, placed at the disposal of the farmer, by a man
called the 'undertaker,' who contracts for the whole gang. 'These gangs
will sometimes travel many miles from their own village; they are to be
met morning and evening on the roads, dressed in short petticoats, with
suitable coats and boots, and sometimes trousers, looking wonderfully
strong and healthy, but tainted with a customary immorality and
heedless of the fatal results which their love of this busy and
independent life is bringing on their unfortunate offspring who are
pining at home.'0


Every phenomenon of the factory districts is here reproduced,
including, but to a greater extent, ill-disguised infanticide, and
dosing children with opiates.1

'My knowledge of such evils,' says Dr. Simon, the medical officer of
the Privy Council and editor in chief of the Reports on Public Health,
'may excuse the profound misgiving with which I regard any large
industrial employment of adult women.'2

'Happy indeed,' exclaims Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, in his
official report, 'happy indeed will it be for the manufacturing
districts of England, when every married woman having a family is
prohibited from working in any textile works at all.'3


The moral degradation caused by the capitalistic exploitation of women
and children has been so exhaustively depicted by F. Engels in his
'Lage der Arbeitenden Klasse Englands,' and other writers, that I need
only mention the subject in this place. But the intellectual desolation
artificially produced by converting immature human beings into mere
machines for the fabrication of surplus value, a state of mind clearly
distinguishable from that natural ignorance which keeps the mind fallow
without destroying its capacity for development, its natural fertility,
this desolation finally compelled even the English Parliament to make
elementary education a compulsory condition to the 'productive'
employment of children under 14 years, in every industry subject to the
Factory Acts. The spirit of capitalist production stands out clearly in
the ludicrous wording of the so-called education clauses in the Factory
Acts, in the absence of an administrative machinery, an absence that
again makes the compulsion illusory, in the opposition of the
manufacturers themselves to these education clauses, and in the tricks
and dodges they put in practice for evading them.

'For this the legislature is alone to blame, by having passed a
delusive law, which, while it would seem to provide that the children
employed in factories shall be "educated, "contains no enactment by
which that professed end can be secured. It provides nothing more than
that the children shall on certain days of the week, and for a certain
number of hours (three) in each day, be inclosed within the four walls
of a place called a school, and that the employer of the child shall
receive weekly a certificate to that effect signed by a person
designated by the subscriber as a schoolmaster or schoolmistress.'4

Previous to the passing of the amended Factory Act, 1844, it happened,
not unfrequently, that the certificates of attendance at school were
signed by the schoolmaster or schoolmistress with a cross, as they
themselves were unable to write.

'On one occasion, on visiting a place called a school, from which
certificates of school attendance, had issued, I was so struck with the
ignorance of the master, that I said to him: 'Pray, sir, can you read?'
His reply was: 'Aye, summat!' and as a justification of his right to
grant certificates, he added: 'At any rate, I am before my scholars.''

The inspectors, when the Bill of 1844 was in preparation, did not fail
to represent the disgraceful state of the places called schools,
certificates from which they were obliged to admit as a compliance with
the laws, but they were successful only in obtaining thus much, that
since the passing of the Act of 1845,

the figures in the school certificate must be filled up in the
handwriting of the schoolmaster, who must also sign his Christian and
surname in full.'5


Sir John Kincaid, factory inspector for Scotland, relates experiences
of the same kind.

'The first school we visited was kept by a Mrs. Ann Killin. Upon asking
her to spell her name, she straightway made a mistake, by beginning
with the letter C, but correcting herself immediately, she said her
name began with a K. On looking at her signature, however, in the
school certificate books, I noticed that she spelt it in various ways,
while her handwriting left no doubt as to her unfitness to teach. She
herself also acknowledged that she could not keep the register ... In a
second school I found the schoolroom 15 feet long, and 10 feet wide,
and counted in this space 75 children, who were gobbling something
unintelligible'6 But it is not only in the miserable places above
referred to that the children obtain certificates of school attendance
without having received instruction of any value, for in many schools
where there is a competent teacher, his efforts are of little avail
from the distracting crowd of children of all ages, from infants of 3
years old and upwards; his livelihood, miserable at the best, depending
on the pence received from the greatest number of children whom it is
possible to cram into the space. To this is to be added scanty school
furniture, deficiency of books, and other materials for teaching, and
the depressing effect upon the poor children themselves of a close,
noisome atmosphere. I have been in many such schools, where I have seen
rows of children doing absolutely nothing; and this is certified as
school attendance, and, in statistical returns, such children are set
down as being educated.'7


In Scotland the manufacturers try all they can to do without the
children that are obliged to attend school.

'It requires no further argument to prove that the educational clauses
of the Factory Act, being held in such disfavour among mill-owners,
tend in a great measure to exclude that class of children alike from
the employment and the benefit of education contemplated by this Act.'8


Horribly grotesque does this appear in print works, which are regulated
by a special Act. By that Act,

'every child, before being employed in a print work must have attended
school for at least 30 days, and not less than 150 hours, during the
six months immediately preceding such first day of employment, and
during the continuance of its employment in the print works, it must
attend for a like period of 30 days, and 150 hours during every
successive period of six months.... The attendance at school must be
between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. No attendance of less than 2 1/2 hours, nor
more than 5 hours on any one day, shall be reckoned as part of the 150
hours. Under ordinary circumstances the children attend school morning
and afternoon for 30 days, for at least 5 hours each day, and upon the
expiration of the 30 days, the statutory total of 150 hours having been
attained, having, in their language, made up their book, they return to
the print work, where they continue until the six months have expired,
when another instalment of school attendance becomes due, and they
again seek the school until the book is again made up.... Many boys
having attended school for the required number of hours, when they
return to school after the expiration of their six months' work in the
print work, are in the same condition as when they first attended
school as print-work boys, that they have lost all they gained by their
previous school attendance.... In other print works the children's
attendance at school is made to depend altogether upon the exigencies
of the work in the establishment. The requisite number of hours is made
up each six months, by instalments consisting of from 3 to 5 hours at a
time, spreading over, perhaps, the whole six months.... For instance,
the attendance on one day might be from 8 to 11 a.m., on another day
from I p.m. to 4 p.m., and the child might not appear at school again
for several days, when it would attend from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; then it
might attend for 3 or 4 days consecutively, or for a week, then it
would not appear in school for 3 weeks or a month, after that upon some
odd days at some odd hours when the operative who employed it chose to
spare it; and thus the child was, as it were, buffeted from school to
work, from work to school, until the tale of 150 hours was told.'9

By the excessive addition of women and children to the ranks of the
workers, machinery at last breaks down the resistance which the male
operatives in the manufacturing period continued to oppose to the
despotism of capital.0

==== B. Prolongation of the Working day === =

If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the
productiveness of labour -- i.e., for shortening the working-time
required in the production of a commodity, it becomes in the hands of
capital the most powerful means, in those industries first invaded by
it, for lengthening the working day beyond all bounds set by human
nature. It creates, on the one hand, new conditions by which capital is
enabled to give free scope to this its constant tendency, and on the
other hand, new motives with which to whet capital's appetite for the
labour of others.

In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements of labour
become automatic, things moving and working independent of the workman.
They are thenceforth an industrial "perpetuum mobile", that would go on
producing forever, did it not meet with certain natural obstructions in
the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human attendants. The
automaton, as capital, and because it is capital, is endowed, in the
person of the capitalist, with intelligence and will; it is therefore
animated by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resistance offered
by that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man.1 This resistance is
moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, and by the
more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed on
it.2

The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely proportional
to the value transferred by it to the product. The longer the life of
the machine, the greater is the mass of the products over which the
value transmitted by the machine is spread, and the less is the portion
of that value added to each single commodity. The active lifetime of a
machine is, however, clearly dependent on the length of the working
day, or on the duration of the daily labour-process multiplied by the
number of days for which the process is carried on.

The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional to its
working-time. And even if it were so, a machine working 16 hours daily
for 7 1/2 years, covers as long a working period as, and transmits to
the total product no more value than, the same machine would if it
worked only 8 hours daily for 15 years. But in the first case the value
of the machine would be reproduced twice as quickly as in the latter,
and the capitalist would, by this use of the machine, absorb in 7 1/2
years as much surplus value as in the second case he would in 15.

The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. The one arises
from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from non-use, as
a sword rusts when left in its scabbard. The latter kind is due to the
elements. The former is more or less directly proportional, the latter
to a certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine.3

But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also
undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. It loses
exchange-value, either by machines of the same sort being produced
cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competition with
it.4 In both cases, be the machine ever so young and full of life, its
value is no longer determined by the labour actually materialised in
it, but by the labour-time requisite to reproduce either it or the
better machine. It has, therefore, lost value more or less. The shorter
the period taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger
of moral depreciation; and the longer the working day, the shorter is
that period. When machinery is first introduced into an industry, new
methods of reproducing it more cheaply follow blow upon blow5 , and so
do improvements, that not only affect individual parts and details of
the machine, but its entire build. It is, therefore, in the early days
of the life of machinery that this special incentive to the
prolongation of the working day makes itself felt most acutely.6

Given the length of the working day, all other circumstances remaining
the same, the exploitation of double the number of workmen demands, not
only a doubling of that part of constant capital which is invested in
machinery and buildings, but also of that part which is laid out in raw
material and auxiliary substances. The lengthening of the working day,
on the other hand, allows of production on an extended scale without
any alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and
buildings.7 Not only is there, therefore, an increase of surplus value,
but the outlay necessary to obtain it diminishes. It is true that this
takes place, more or less, with every lengthening of the working day;
but in the case under consideration, the change is more marked, because
the capital converted into the instruments of labour preponderates to a
greater degree. 8 The development of the factory system fixes a
constantly increasing portion of the capital in a form, in which, on
the one hand, its value is capable of continual self-expansion, and in
which, on the other hand, it loses both use-value and exchange-value
whenever it loses contact with living labour. 'When a labourer,' said
Mr. Ashworth, a cotton magnate, to Professor Nassau W. Senior, 'lays
down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital worth
eighteen-pence. When one of our people leaves the mill, he renders
useless a capital that has cost Pounds 100,000.'9 Only fancy! making
'useless' for a single moment, a capital that has cost Pounds 100,000!
It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single one of our people should ever
leave the factory! The increased use of machinery, as Senior after the
instruction he received from Ashworth clearly perceives, makes a
constantly increasing lengthening of the working day 'desirable.' 0


Machinery produces relative surplus value; not only by directly
depreciating the value of labour-power, and by indirectly cheapening
the same through cheapening the commodities that enter into its
reproduction, but also, when it is first introduced sporadically into
an industry, by converting the labour employed by the owner of that
machinery, into labour of a higher degree and greater efficacy, by
raising the social value of the article produced above its individual
value, and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day's
labour-power by a smaller portion of the value of a day's product.
During this transition period, when the use of machinery is a sort of
monopoly, the profits are therefore exceptional, and the capitalist
endeavours to exploit thoroughly 'the sunny time of this his first
love,' by prolonging the working day as much as possible. The magnitude
of the profit whets his appetite for more profit.

As the use of machinery becomes more general in a particular industry,
the social value of the product sinks down to its individual value, and
the law that surplus value does not arise from the labour-power that
has been replaced by the machinery, but from the labour-power actually
employed in working with the machinery, asserts itself. Surplus value
arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount of
surplus value depends on two factors, viz., the rate of surplus value
and the number of the workmen simultaneously employed. Given the length
of the working day, the rate of surplus value is determined by the
relative duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus labour in
a day. The number of the labourers simultaneously employed depends, on
its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. Now,
however much the use of machinery may increase the surplus labour at
the expense of the necessary labour by heightening the productiveness
of labour, it is clear that it attains this result, only by diminishing
the number of workmen employed by a given amount of capital. It
converts what was formerly variable capital, invested in labour-power,
into machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce surplus
value. It is impossible, for instance, to squeeze as much surplus value
out of 2 as out of 24 labourers. If each of these 24 men gives only one
hour of surplus labour in 12, the 24 men give together 24 hours of
surplus labour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men.
Hence, the application of machinery to the production of surplus value
implies a contradiction which is immanent in it, since of the two
factors of the surplus value created by a given amount of capital, one,
the rate of surplus value, cannot be increased, except by diminishing
the other, the number of workmen. This contradiction comes to light, as
soon as by the general employment of machinery in a given industry, the
value of the machine-produced commodity regulates the value of all
commodities of the same sort; and it is this contradiction, that in its
turn, drives the capitalist, without his being conscious of the fact,1
to excessive lengthening of the working day, in order that he may
compensate the decrease in the relative number of labourers exploited,
by an increase not only of the relative, but of the absolute surplus
labour.

If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the one hand,
supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive lengthening of the
working day, and radically changes, as well the methods of labour, as
also the character of the social working organism, in such a manner as
to break down all opposition to this tendency, on the other hand it
produces, partly by opening out to the capitalist new strata of the
working-class, previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free
the labourers it supplants, a surplus working population,2 which is
compelled to submit to the dictation of capital. Hence that remarkable
phenomenon in the history of modern industry, that machinery sweeps
away every moral and natural restriction on the length of the working
day. Hence, too, the economic paradox, that the most powerful
instrument for shortening labour-time, becomes the most unfailing means
for placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his family,
at the disposal of the capitalist for the purpose of expanding the
value of his capital. 'If,' dreamed Aristotle, the greatest thinker of
antiquity, 'if every tool, when summoned, or even of its own accord,
could do the work that befits it, just as the creations of Daedalus
moved of themselves, or the tripods of Hephaestos went of their own
accord to their sacred work, if the weavers' shuttles were to weave of
themselves, then there would be no need either of apprentices for the
master workers, or of slaves for the lords.' 3 And Antipatros, a Greek
poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the invention of the water-wheel for
grinding corn, an invention that is the elementary form of all
machinery, as the giver of freedom to female slaves, and the bringer
back of the golden age.4 Oh! those heathens! They understood, as the
learned Bastiat, and before him the still wiser MacCulloch have
discovered, nothing of Political Economy and Christianity. They did
not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of
lengthening the working day. They perhaps excused the slavery of one on
the ground that it was a means to the full development of another. But
to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few crude and
half-educated parvenus, might become 'eminent spinners,' 'extensive
sausage-makers,' and 'influential shoe-black dealers,' to do this, they
lacked the bump of Christianity.

==== C. Intensification of Labour === =

The immoderate lengthening of the working day, produced by machinery in
the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on the part of society, the
very sources of whose life are menaced; and, thence, to a normal
working day whose length is fixed by law. Thenceforth a phenomenon.
that we have already met with, namely, the intensification of labour,
develops into great importance. Our analysis of absolute surplus value
had reference primarily to the extension or duration of the labour, its
intensity being assumed as given. We now proceed to consider the
substitution of a more intensified labour for labour of more extensive
duration, and the degree of the former.

It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery spreads,
and the experience of a special class of workmen habituated to
machinery accumulates, the rapidity and intensity of labour increase as
a natural consequence. Thus in England, during half a century,
lengthening of the working day went hand in hand with increasing
intensity of factory labour. Nevertheless the reader will clearly see,
that where we have labour, not carried on by fits and starts, but
repeated day after day with unvarying uniformity, a point must
inevitably be reached, where extension of the working day and intensity
of the labour mutually exclude one another, in such a way that
lengthening of the working day becomes compatible only with a lower
degree of intensity, and a higher degree of intensity, only with a
shortening of the working day. So soon as the gradually surging revolt
of the working-class compelled Parliament to shorten compulsorily the
hours of labour, and to begin by imposing a normal working day on
factories proper, so soon consequently as an increased production of
surplus value by the prolongation of the working day was once for all
put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all its might
into the production of relative surplus value, by hastening on the
further improvement of machinery. At the same time a change took place
in the nature of relative surplus value. Generally speaking, the mode
of producing relative surplus value consists in raising the productive
power of the workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a given
time with the same expenditure of labour. Labour-time continues to
transmit as before the same value to the total product, but this
unchanged amount of exchange-value is spread over more use-value; hence
the value of each single commodity sinks. Otherwise, however, so soon
as the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place. The
immense impetus it gives the development of productive power, and to
economy in the means of production, imposes on the workman increased
expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened tension of
labour-power, and closer filling up of the pores of the working day, or
condensation of labour to a degree that is attainable only within the
limits of the shortened working day. This condensation of a greater
mass of labour into a given period thenceforward counts for what it
really is, a greater quantity of labour. In addition to a measure of
its extension, i.e., duration, labour now acquires a measure of its
intensity or of the degree of its condensation or density.5 The denser
hour of the ten hours' working day contains more labour, i.e., expended
labour-power. than the more porous hour of the twelve hours' working
day. The product therefore of one of the former hours has as much or
more value than has the product of 1 1/5 of the latter hours. Apart
from the increased yield of relative surplus value through the
heightened productiveness of labour, the same mass of value is now
produced for the capitalist say by 3 1/3 hours of surplus labour, and 6
2/3 hours of necessary labour, as was previously produced by four hours
of surplus labour and eight hours of necessary labour.

We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified?

The first effect of shortening the working day results from the
self-evident law, that the efficiency of labour-power is in an inverse
ratio to the duration of its expenditure. Hence, within certain limits
what is lost by shortening the duration is gained by the increasing
tension of labour-power. That the workman moreover really does expend
more labour-power, is ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays
him.6 In those industries, such as potteries, where machinery plays
little or no part, the introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly
shown that the mere shortening of the working day increases to a
wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity, and
energy of the labour.7 It seemed, however, doubtful whether this effect
was produced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman
on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had already
created the strictest discipline. Hence, when in 1844 the reduction of
the working day to less than twelve hours was being debated, the
masters almost unanimously declared

'that their overlookers in the different rooms took good care that the
hands lost no time,' that 'the extent of vigilance and attention on the
part of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased,' and,
therefore, that the speed of the machinery and other conditions
remaining unaltered, 'to expect in a well-managed factory any important
result from increased attention of the workmen was an absurdity.'8


This assertion was contradicted by experiments. Mr. Robert Gardner
reduced the hours of labour in his two large factories at Preston, on
and after the 20th April, 1844, from twelve to eleven hours a day. The
result of about a year's working was that 'the same amount of product
for the same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned in
eleven hours as much wages as they did before in twelve.'9 I pass over
the experiments made in the spinning and carding rooms, because they
were accompanied by an increase of 2% in the speed of the machines.
But in the weaving department, where, moreover, many sorts of figured
fancy articles were woven, there was not the slightest alteration in
the conditions of the work. The result was: 'From 6th January to 20th
April, 1844, with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages of each
hand 10s. 1 1/2d., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with day of
eleven hours, average weekly wages 10s. 3 1/2d.'0 Here we have more
produced in eleven hours than previously in twelve, and entirely in
consequence of more steady application and economy of time by the
workpeople. While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare
time, the capitalist got the same amount produced and saved the cost of
coal, gas, and other such items, for one hour. Similar experiments, and
with the like success, were carried out in the mills of Messrs.
Horrocks and Jacson.1

The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, the
subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by enabling the
workman to exert more strength in a given time. So soon as that
shortening becomes compulsory, machinery becomes in the hands of
capital the objective means, systematically employed for squeezing out
more labour in a given time. This is effected in two ways: by
increasing the speed of the machinery, and by giving the workman more
machinery to tent. Improved construction of the machinery is necessary,
partly because without it greater pressure cannot be put on the
workman, and partly because the shortened hours of labour force the
capitalist to exercise the strictest watch over the cost of production.
The improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed,
and at the same time have made it possible, by means of a greater
economy of power, to drive with the same or even a smaller consumption
of coal more machinery with the same engine. The improvements in the
transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so strikingly
distinguishes modern from the older machinery, have reduced the
diameter and weight of the shafting to a constantly decreasing minimum.
Finally, the improvements in the operative machines have, while
reducing their size, increased their speed and efficiency, as in the
modern power-loom; or, while increasing the size of their framework,
have also increased the extent and number of their working parts, as in
spinning-mules, or have added to the speed of these working parts by
imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years ago
increased the speed of the spindles in self-acting mules by one-fifth.

The reduction of the working day to 12 hours dates in England from
1832. In 1836 a manufacturer stated:

'The labour now undergone in the factories is much greater than it used
to be ... compared with thirty or forty years ago ... owing to the
greater attention and activity required by the greatly increased speed
which is given to the machinery.'2


In the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House
of Commons the following statements, supported by documentary evidence:

'The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture,
is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations.
Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that would demand the sinews
of millions of men; but it has also prodigiously multiplied the labour
of those. who are governed by its fearful movements.... In 1815, the
labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40 --
reckoning 12 hours to the working day -- involved a necessity of
walking 8 miles. In 1832, the distance travelled in following a pair of
mules, spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and
frequently more. In 1835' (query -- 1815 or 1825?) 'the spinner put up
daily, on each of these mules, 820 stretches, making a total of 1,640
stretches in the course of the day. In 1832, the spinner put up on each
mule 2,200 stretches, making a total of 4,400. In 1844, 2,400
stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in some cases the amount of
labour required is even still greater.... I have another document sent
to me in 1842, stating that the labour is progressively
increasing-increasing not only because the distance to be travelled is
greater, but because the quantity of goods produced is multiplied,
while the hands are fewer in proportion than before; and, moreover,
because an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it is
more difficult to work.... In the carding-room there has also been a
great increase of labour. One person there does the work formerly
divided between two. In the weaving-room, where a vast number of
persons are employed, and principally females ... the labour has
increased within the last few years fully 10 per cent., owing to the
increased speed of the machinery in spinning. In 1838, the number of
hanks spun per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. In 1819,
the number of picks in power-loom-weaving per minute was 60 -- in 1842
it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour.'3

In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had already
been reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours' Act, there appeared to be
a justification for the assertion made at that time by the English
manufacturers, that any further progress in that direction was
impossible, and therefore that every further reduction of the hours of
labour meant a lessened production. The apparent correctness of their
reasons will be best shown by the following contemporary statement by
Leonard Horner, the factory inspector, their ever watchful censor.

'Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regulated by the
speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of the mill-owner to
drive it at the utmost rate of speed consistent with these following
conditions, viz., the preservation of the machinery from too rapid
deterioration; the preservation of the quality of the article
manufactured; and the capability of the workman to follow the motion
without a greater exertion than he can sustain for a constancy. One of
the most important problems, therefore, which the owner of a factory
has to solve is to find out the maximum speed at which he can run, with
a due regard to the above conditions. It frequently happens that he
finds he has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than
counterbalance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slacken
his pace. I therefore concluded, that as an active and intelligent
mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to
produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve. I further assumed that
the operative paid by piecework, would exert himself to the utmost
consistent with the power of continuing at the same rate.'4

Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction of the
working hours below twelve would necessarily diminish production.5 He
himself, ten years later, cites his opinion of 1845 in proof of how
much he under-estimated in that year the elasticity of machinery, and
of man's labour-power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to an
extreme by the compulsory shortening of the working day.

We now come to the period that follows the introduction of the Ten
Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk, and flax
mills.

'The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, and upon
mules 1,000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of the throstle
spindle, which in 1839 was 4,500 times a minute, is now (1862) 5,000;
and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is now 6,000 times a minute,
amounting in the former case to one-tenth, and in the second case to
one-fifth additional increase.' 6


James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near
Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written in 1852,
the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine that had been made
between the years 1848 and 1852. After remarking that the horse-power
of steam-engines, being always estimated in the official returns
according to the power of similar engines in 18287 , is only nominal,
and can serve only as an index of their real power, he goes on to say:

'I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we
are now obtaining at least 50 per cent. more duty or work performed on
the average, and that in many cases the identical steam-engines which
in the days of the restricted speed of 220 feet per minute, yielded 50
horsepower, are now yielding upwards of 100...' "The modern
steam-engine of 100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much
greater force than formerly, arising from improvements in its
construction, the capacity and construction of the boilers, &c....'
'Although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the
horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in
proportion to the machinery.'8 'In the year 1850, the factories of the
United Kingdom employed 134,217 nominal horse-power to give motion to
25,638,716 spindles and 301,445 looms. The number of spindles and looms
in 1856 was respectively 33,503,580 of the former, and 369,205 of the
latter, which, reckoning the force of the nominal horse-power required
to be the same as in 1850, would require a force equal to 175,000
horses, but the actual power given in the return for 1856 is 161,435,
less by above 10,000 horses than, calculating upon the basis of the
return of 1850, the factories ought to have required in 1856.' 9 'The
facts thus brought out by the Return (of 1856) appear to be that the
factory system is increasing rapidly; that although the same number of
hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former
periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery;
that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight of
machinery by economy of force and other methods, and that an increased
quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in machinery, and in
methods of manufacture, by increase of speed of the machinery, and by a
variety of other causes.' 0


'The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised
their productive power very much. Without any doubt, the shortening of
the hours of labour... gave the impulse to these improvements. The
latter, combined with the more intense strain on the workman, have had
the effect, that at least as much is produced in the shortened (by two
hours or one-sixth) working day as was previously produced during the
longer one.'1

One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the
manufacturers increased along with the more intense exploitation of
labour-power. From 1838 to 1850, the average proportional increase in
English cotton and other factories was 32%, while from 1850 to 1856
it amounted to 86%.

But however great the progress of English industry had been during the
8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a working day of 10
hours, it wag far surpassed during the next period of 6 years from 1856
to 1862. In silk factories, for instance, there were in 1856, spindles
1,093,799; in 1862, 1,388,544; in 1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709.
But the number of operatives was, in 1856, 56,131; in 1862, 52,429. The
increase in the spindles was therefore 26.9% and in the looms
15.6%, while the number of the operatives decreased 7%. In the year
1850 there were employed in worsted mills 875,830 spindles; in 1856,
1,324,549 (increase 51.2%), and in 1862, 1,289,172 (decrease 2.7%).
But if we deduct the doubling spindles that figure in the numbers for
1856, but not in those for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the
number of spindles remained nearly stationary. On the other hand, after
1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases doubled.
The number of power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 32,617; in
1856, 38,956; in 1862, 43,048. The number of the operatives was, in
1850, 79,737; in 1856, 87,794; in 1862, 86,063; included in these,
however, the children under 14 years of age were, in 1850, 9,956; in
1856, 11,228; in 1862, 13,178. In spite, therefore, of the greatly
increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number
of the workpeople employed decreased, and that of the children
exploited increased.2 On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the
House of Commons:

'I have been informed by delegates from 16 districts of Lancashire and
Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work in the factories is,
in consequence of the improvements in machinery, constantly on the
increase. Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two
looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no
uncommon thing for one person to tent four. Twelve hours' work, as is
evident from the facts adduced, is now compressed into less than 10
hours. It is therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the
toil of the factory operative has increased during the last 10 years.'3

Although, therefore, the Factory Inspectors unceasingly and with
justice, commend the results of the Acts of 1844 and 1850, yet they
admit that the shortening of the hours of labour has already called
forth such an intensification of the labour as is injurious to the
health of the workman and to his capacity for work.

'In most of the cotton, worsted, and silk mills, an exhausting state of
excitement necessary to enable the workers satisfactorily to mind the
machinery, the motion of which has been greatly accelerated within the
last few years, seems to me not unlikely to be one of the causes of
that excess of mortality from lung disease, which Dr. Greenhow has
pointed out in his recent report on this subject.'4

There cannot be the slightest doubt that the tendency that urges
capital, so soon as a prolongation of the hours of labour is once for
all forbidden, to compensate itself, by a systematic heightening of the
intensity of labour, and to convert every improvement in machinery into
a more perfect means of exhausting the workman, must soon lead to a
state of things in which a reduction of the hours of labour will again
be inevitable.5 On the other hand, the rapid advance of English
industry between 1848 and the present time, under the influence of a
day of 10 hours, surpasses the advance made between 1833 and 1847, when
the day was 12 hours long, by far more than the latter surpasses the
advance made during the half century after the first introduction of
the factory system, when the working day was without limits.6

=== Section 4: The Factory == =

At the commencement of this chapter we considered that which we may
call the body of the factory, i.e., machinery organised into a system.
We there saw how machinery, by annexing the labour of women and
children, augments the number of human beings who form the material for
capitalistic exploitation, how it confiscates the whole of the
workman's disposable time, by immoderate extension of the hours of
labour, and how finally its progress, which allows of enormous increase
of production in shorter and shorter periods, serves as a means of
systematically getting more work done in a shorter time, or of
exploiting labour-power more intensely. We now turn to the factory as a
whole, and that in its most perfect form.

Dr. Ure, the Pindar of the automatic factory, describes it, on the one
hand, as

'Combined co-operation of many orders of workpeople, adult and young,
in tending with assiduous skill, a system of productive machines,
continuously impelled by a central power' (the prime mover); on the
other hand, as 'a vast automaton, composed of various mechanical and
intellectual organs, acting in uninterrupted concert for the production
of a common object, all of them being subordinate to a self-regulated
moving force.'

These two descriptions are far from being identical. In one, the
collective labourer, or social body of labour, appears as the dominant
subject, and the mechanical automaton as the object; in the other, the
automaton itself is the subject, and the workmen are merely conscious
organs, co-ordinate with the unconscious organs of the automaton, and
together with them, subordinated to the central moving-power. The first
description is applicable to every possible employment of machinery on
a large scale, the second is characteristic of its use by capital, and
therefore of the modern factory system. Ure prefers therefore, to
describe the central machine, from which the motion comes, not only as
an automaton, but as an autocrat. 'In these spacious halls the
benignant power of steam summons around him his myriads of willing
menials.'7


Along with the tool, the skill of the workman in handling it passes
over to the machine. The capabilities of the tool are emancipated from
the restraints that are inseparable from human labour-power. Thereby
the technical foundation on which is based the division of labour in
Manufacture, is swept away. Hence, in the place of the hierarchy of
specialised workmen that characterises manufacture, there steps, in the
automatic factory, a tendency to equalise and reduce to one and the
same level every kind of work that has to be done by the minders of the
machines;8 in the place of the artificially produced differentiations
of the detail workmen, step the natural differences of age and sex.

So far as division of labour re-appears in the factory, it is primarily
a distribution of the workmen among the specialised machines; and of
masses of workmen, not however organised into groups, among the various
departments of the factory, in each of which they work at a number of
similar machines placed together; their co-operation, therefore, is
only simple. The organised group, peculiar to manufacture, is replaced
by the connexion between the head workman and his few assistants. The
essential division is, into workmen who are actually employed on the
machines (among whom are included a few who look after the engine), and
into mere attendants (almost exclusively children) of these workmen.
Among the attendants are reckoned more or less all 'Feeders' who supply
the machines with the material to be worked. In addition to these two
principal classes, there is a numerically unimportant class of persons,
whose occupation it is to look after the whole of the machinery and
repair it from time to time; such as engineers, mechanics, joiners, &c.
This is a superior class of workmen, some of them scientifically
educated, others brought up to a trade; it is distinct from the factory
operative class, and merely aggregated to it.9 This division of labour
is purely technical.

To work at a machine, the workman should be taught from childhood, in
order that he may learn to adapt his own movements to the uniform and
unceasing motion of an automaton. When the machinery, as a whole, forms
a system of manifold machines, working simultaneously and in concert,
the co-operation based upon it, requires the distribution of various
groups of workmen among the different kinds of machines. But the
employment of machinery does away with the necessity of crystallising
this distribution after the manner of Manufacture, by the constant
annexation of a particular man to a particular function.00 Since the
motion of the whole system does not proceed from the workman, but from
the machinery, a change of persons can take place at any time without
an interruption of the work. The most striking proof of this is
afforded by the "relays system", put into operation by the
manufacturers during their revolt from 1848-1850. Lastly, the quickness
with which machine work is learnt by young people, does away with the
necessity of bringing up for exclusive employment by machinery, a
special class of operatives.01 With regard to the work of the mere
attendants, it can, to some extent, be replaced in the mill by
machines,02 and owing to its extreme simplicity, it allows of a rapid
and constant change of the individuals burdened with this drudgery.

Although then, technically speaking, the old system of division of
labour is thrown overboard by machinery, it hangs on in the factory, as
a traditional habit handed down from Manufacture, and is afterwards
systematically re-moulded and established in a more hideous form by
capital, as a means of exploiting labour-power. The life-long
speciality of handling one and the same tool, now becomes the life-long
speciality of serving one and the same machine. Machinery is put to a
wrong use, with the object of transforming the workman, from his very
childhood, into a part of a detail-machine.03 In this way, not only are
the expenses of his reproduction considerably lessened, but at the same
time his helpless dependence upon the factory as a whole, and therefore
upon the capitalist, is rendered complete. Here as everywhere else, we
must distinguish between the increased productiveness due to the
development of the social process of production, and that due to the
capitalist exploitation of that process. In handicrafts and
manufacture, the workman makes use of a tool, in the factory, the
machine makes use of him. There the movements of the instrument of
labour proceed from him, here it is the movements of the machine that
he must follow. In manufacture the workmen are parts of a living
mechanism. In the factory we have a lifeless mechanism independent of
the workman, who becomes its mere living appendage.

'The miserable routine of endless drudgery and toil in which the same
mechanical process is gone through over and over again, is like the
labour of Sisyphus. The burden of labour, like the rock, keeps ever
falling back on the worn-out labourer.'04


At the same time that factory work exhausts the nervous system to the
uttermost, it does away with the many-sided play of the muscles, and
confiscates every atom of freedom, both in bodily and intellectual
activity.05 The lightening of the labour, even, becomes a sort of
torture, since the machine does not free the labourer from work, but
deprives the work of all interest. Every kind of capitalist production,
in so far as it is not only a labour-process, but also a process of
creating surplus value, has this in common, that it is not the workman
that employs the instruments of labour, but the instruments of labour
that employ the workman. But it is only in the factory system that this
inversion for the first time acquires technical and palpable reality.
By means of its conversion into an automaton, the instrument of labour
confronts the labourer, during the labour-process, in the shape of
capital, of dead labour, that dominates, and pumps dry, living
labour-power. The separation of the intellectual powers of production
from the manual labour, and the conversion of those powers into the
might of capital over labour, is, as we have already shown. finally
completed by modern industry erected on the foundation of machinery.
The special skill of each individual insignificant factory operative
vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity before the science, the gigantic
physical forces, and the mass of labour that are embodied in the
factory mechanism and, together with that mechanism, constitute the
power of the 'master.' This 'master,' therefore, in whose brain the
machinery and his monopoly of it are inseparably united, whenever he
falls out with his 'hands,' contemptuously tells them:

'The factory operatives should keep in wholesome remembrance the fact
that theirs is really a low species of skilled labour; and that there
is none which is more easily acquired, or of its quality more amply
remunerated, or which by a short training of the least expert can be
more quickly, as well as abundantly, acquired.... The master's
machinery really plays a far more important part in the business of
production than the labour and the skill of the operative, which six
months' education can teach, and a common labourer can learn.'06


The technical subordination of the workman to the uniform motion of the
instruments of labour, and the peculiar composition of the body of
workpeople, consisting as it does of individuals of both sexes and of
all ages, give rise to a barrack discipline, which is elaborated into a
complete system in the factory, and which fully develops the before
mentioned labour of overlooking, thereby dividing the workpeople into
operatives and overlookers, into private soldiers and sergeants of an
industrial army. 'The main difficulty ... lay ... above all in training
human beings to renounce their desultory habits of work, and to
identify themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex
automaton. To devise and administer a successful code of factory
discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the
Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright! Even at the
present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its labour
lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert
persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory hands.'07 The
factory code in which capital formulates, like a private legislator,
and at his own good will, his autocracy over his workpeople,
unaccompanied by that division of responsibility, in other matters so
much approved of by the bourgeoisie, and unaccompanied by the still
more approved representative system, this code is but the capitalistic
caricature of that social regulation of the labour-process which
becomes requisite in co-operation on a great scale, and in the
employment in common, of instruments of labour and especially of
machinery. The place of the slave-driver's lash is taken by the
overlooker's book of penalties. All punishments naturally resolve
themselves into fines and deductions from wages, and the law-giving
talent of the factory Lycurgus so arranges matters, that a violation of
his laws is, if possible, more profitable to him than the keeping of
them.08 We shall here merely allude to the material conditions under
which factory labour is carried on. Every organ of sense is injured in
an equal degree by artificial elevation of the temperature, by the
dust-laden atmosphere, by the deafening noise, not to mention danger to
life and limb among the thickly crowded machinery, which, with the
regularity of the seasons, issues its list of the killed and wounded in
the industrial battle.09 Economy of the social means of production,
matured and forced as in a hothouse by the factory system, is turned,
in the hands of capital, into systematic robbery of what is necessary
for the life of the workman while he is at work, robbery of space,
light, air, and of protection to his person against the dangerous and
unwholesome accompaniments of the productive process, not to mention
the robbery of appliances for the comfort of the workman.10 Is Fourier
wrong when he calls factories 'tempered bagnos"?11

=== Section 5: The Strife Between Workman and Machine == =

The contest between the capitalist and the wage-labourer dates back to
the very origin of capital. It raged on throughout the whole
manufacturing period. 12 But only since the introduction of machinery
has the workman fought against the instrument of labour itself, the
material embodiment of capital. He revolts against this particular form
of the means of production, as being the material basis of the
capitalist mode of production.

In the 17th century nearly all Europe experienced revolts of the
workpeople against the ribbon-loom, a machine for weaving ribbons and
trimmings, called in Germany Bandm√ºhle, Schnurm√ºhle, and
M√ºhlenstuhl. These machines were invented in Germany. Abb√©
Lancellotti, in a work that appeared in Venice in 1636, but which was
written in 1579, says as follows:

'Anthony M√ºller of Danzig saw about 50 years ago in that town, a very
ingenious machine, which weaves 4 to 6 pieces at once. But the Mayor
being apprehensive that this invention might throw a large number of
workmen on the streets, caused the inventor to be secretly strangled or
drowned.'

In Leyden, this machine was not used till 1629; there the riots of the
ribbon-weavers at length compelled the Town Council to prohibit it.

'In hac urbe,' says Boxhorn (Inst. Pol., 1663), referring to the
introduction of this machine into Leyden, 'ante hos viginti circiter
annos instrumentum quidam invenerunt textorium, quo solus plus panni et
facilius conficere poterat, quan plures aequali tempore. Hinc turbae
ortae et querulae textorum, tandemque usus hujus instrumenti a
magistratu prohibitus est.'




After making various decrees more or less prohibitive against this loom
in 1632, 1639, &c., the States General of Holland at length permitted
it to be used, under certain conditions, by the decree of the 15th
December, 1661. It was also prohibited in Cologne in 1676, at the same
time that its introduction into England was causing disturbances among
the workpeople. By an imperial Edict of 19th Feb., 1685, its use was
forbidden throughout all Germany. In Hamburg it was burnt in public by
order of the Senate. The Emperor Charles VI., on 9th Feb., 1719,
renewed the edict of 1685, and not till 1765 was its use openly allowed
in the Electorate of Saxony. This machine, which shook Europe to its
foundations, was in fact the precursor of the mule and the power-loom,
and of the industrial revolution of the 18th century. It enabled a
totally inexperienced boy, to set the whole loom with all its shuttles
in motion, by simply moving a rod backwards and forwards, and in its
improved form produced from 40 to 50 pieces at once.

About 1630, a wind-sawmill, erected near London by a Dutchman,
succumbed to the excesses of the populace. Even as late as the
beginning of the 18th century, sawmills driven by water overcame the
opposition of the people, supported as it was by Parliament, only with
great difficulty. No sooner had Everet in 1758 erected the first
wool-shearing machine that was driven by water-power, than it was set
on fire by 100,000 people who had been thrown out of work. Fifty
thousand workpeople, who had previously lived by carding wool,
petitioned Parliament against Arkwright's scribbling mills and carding
engines. The enormous destruction of machinery that occurred in the
English manufacturing districts during the first 15 years of this
century, chiefly caused by the employment of the power-loom, and known
as the Luddite movement, gave the anti-Jacobin governments of a
Sidmouth, a Castlereagh, and the like, a pretext for the most
reactionary and forcible measures. It took both time and experience
before the workpeople learnt to distinguish between machinery and its
employment by capital, and to direct their attacks, not against the
material instruments of production, but against the mode in which they
are used.13

The contests about wages in Manufacture, pre-suppose manufacture, and
are in no sense directed against its existence. The opposition against
the establishment of new manufactures, proceeds from the guilds and
privileged towns, not from the workpeople. Hence the writers of the
manufacturing period treat the division of labour chiefly as a means of
virtually supplying a deficiency of labourers, and not as a means of
actually displacing those in work. This distinction is self-evident. If
it be said that 100 millions of people would be required in England to
spin with the old spinning-wheel the cotton that is now spun with mules
by 500,000 people, this does not mean that the mules took the place of
those millions who never existed. It means only this, that many
millions of workpeople would be required to replace the spinning
machinery. If, on the other hand, we say, that in England the
power-loom threw 800,000 weavers on the streets, we do not refer to
existing machinery, that would have to be replaced by a definite number
of workpeople, but to a number of weavers in existence who were
actually replaced or displaced by the looms. During the manufacturing
period, handicraft labour, altered though it was by division of labour,
was. yet the basis. The demands of the new colonial markets could not
be satisfied owing to the relatively small number of town operatives
handed down from the middle ages, and the manufactures proper opened
out new fields of production to the rural population, driven from the
land by the dissolution of the feudal system. At that time, therefore,
division of labour and co-operation in the workshops, were viewed more
from the positive aspect, that they made the workpeople more
productive.14 Long before the period of modern industry, co-operation
and the concentration of the instruments of labour in the hands of a
few, gave rise, in numerous countries where these methods were applied
in agriculture, to great, sudden and forcible revolutions in the modes
of production, and consequentially, in the conditions of existence, and
the means of employment of the rural populations. But this contest at
first takes place more between the large and the small landed
proprietors, than between capital and wage labour; on the other hand,
when the labourers are displaced by the instruments of labour, by
sheep, horses, &c., in this case force is directly resorted to in the
first instance as the prelude to the industrial revolution. The
labourers are first driven from the land, and then come the sheep. Land
grabbing on a great scale, such as was perpetrated in England, is the
first step in creating a field for the establishment of agriculture on
a great scale.15 Hence this subversion of agriculture puts on, at
first, more the appearance of a political revolution.

The instrument of labour, when it takes the form of a machine,
immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself.16 The
self-expansion of capital by means of machinery is thenceforward
directly proportional to the number of the workpeople, whose means of
livelihood have been destroyed by that machinery. The whole system of
capitalist production is based on the fact that the workman sells his
labour-power as a commodity. Division of labour specialises this
labour-power, by reducing it to skill in handling a particular tool. So
soon as the handling of this tool becomes the work of a machine, then,
with the use-value, the exchange-value too, of the workman's
labour-power vanishes; the workman becomes unsaleable, like paper money
thrown out of currency by legal enactment. That portion of the
working-class, thus by machinery rendered superfluous, i.e., no longer
immediately necessary for the self-expansion of capital, either goes to
the wall in the unequal contest of the old handicrafts and manufactures
with machinery, or else floods all the more easily accessible branches
of industry, swamps the labour-market, and sinks the price of
labour-power below its value. It is impressed upon the workpeople, as a
great consolation, first, that their sufferings are only temporary ('a
temporary inconvenience"), secondly, that machinery acquires the
mastery over the whole of a given field of production, only by degrees,
so that the extent and intensity of its destructive effect is
diminished. The first consolation neutralises the second. When
machinery seizes on an industry by degrees, it produces chronic misery
among the operatives who compete with it. Where the transition is
rapid, the effect is acute and felt by great masses. History discloses
no tragedy more horrible than the gradual extinction of the English
hand-loom weavers, an extinction that was spread over several decades,
and finally sealed in 1838. Many of them died of starvation, many with
families vegetated for a long time on 2 1/2 d. a day.17 On the other
hand, the English cotton machinery produced an acute effect in India.
The Governor General reported 1834-35:

'The misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. The
bones of the cotton-weavers are bleaching the plains of India.'

No doubt, in turning them out of this 'temporal' world, the machinery
caused them no more than 'a temporary inconvenience.' For the rest,
since machinery is continually seizing upon new fields of production,
its temporary effect is really permanent. Hence, the character of
independence and estrangement which the capitalist mode of production
as a whole gives to the instruments of labour and to the product, as
against the workman, is developed by means of machinery into a thorough
antagonism.18 Therefore, it is with the advent of machinery, that the
workman for the first time brutally revolts against the instruments of
labour.

The instrument of labour strikes down the labourer. This direct
antagonism between the two comes out most strongly, whenever newly
introduced machinery competes with handicrafts or manufactures, handed
down from former times. But even in modern industry the continual
improvement of machinery, and the development of the automatic system,
has an analogous effect.

'The object of improved machinery is to diminish manual labour, to
provide for the performance of a process or the completion of a link in
a manufacture by the aid of an iron instead of the human apparatus.' 19
'The adaptation of power to machinery heretofore moved by hand, is
almost of daily occurrence ... the minor improvements in machinery
having for their object economy of power, the production of better
work, the turning off more work in the same time, or in supplying the
place of a child, a female, or a man, are constant, and although
sometimes apparently of no great moment, have somewhat important
results.'20 'Whenever a process requires peculiar dexterity and
steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn, as soon as possible, from the
cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it
is placed in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so self-regulating that a
child can superintend it.' 21 'On the automatic plan skilled labour
gets progressively superseded.' 22 'The effect of improvements in
machinery, not merely in superseding the necessity for the employment
of the same quantity of adult labour as before, in order to produce a
given result, but in substituting one description of human labour for
another, the less skilled for the more skilled, juvenile for adult,
female for male, causes a fresh disturbance in the rate of wages.'23
'The effect of substituting the self-acting mule for the common mule,
is to discharge the greater part of the men spinners, and to retain
adolescents and children.'24


The extraordinary power of expansion of the factory system owing to
accumulated practical experience, to the mechanical means at hand, and
to constant technical progress, was proved to us by the giant strides
of that system under the pressure of a shortened working day. But who,
in 1860, the Zenith year of the English cotton industry, would have
dreamt of the galloping improvements in machinery, and the
corresponding displacement of working people, called into being during
the following 3 years, under the stimulus of the American Civil War? A
couple of examples from the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories will
suffice on this point. A Manchester manufacturer states:

'We formerly had 75 carding engines, now we have 12, doing the same
quantity of work.... We are doing with fewer hands by 14, at a saving
in wages of Pounds 10 a-week. Our estimated saving in waste is about
10% in the quantity of cotton consumed.' 'In another fine-spinning
mill in Manchester, I was informed that through increased speed and the
adoption of some self-acting processes, a reduction had been made, in
number, of a fourth in one department, and of above half in another,
and that the introduction of the combing machine in place of the second
carding, had considerably reduced, the number of hands formerly
employed in the carding-room.'

Another spinning-mill is estimated to effect a saving of labour of
10%. The Messrs. Gilmour, spinners at Manchester, state: 'In our
blowing-room department we consider our expense with new machinery is
fully one-third less in wages and hands ... in the jack-frame and
drawing-frame room, about one-third less in expense, and likewise
one-third less in hands; in the spinning room about one-third less in
expenses. But this is not all; when our yarn goes to the manufacturers,
it is so much better by the application of our new machinery, that they
will produce a greater quantity of cloth, and cheaper than from the
yarn produced by old machinery.'25 Mr. Redgrave further remarks in the
same Report: 'The reduction of hands against increased production is,
in fact, constantly taking place, in woollen mills the reduction
commenced some time since, and is continuing; a few days since, the
master of a school in the neighbourhood of Rochdale said to me, that
the great falling off in the girls' school is not only caused by the
distress, but by the changes of machinery in the woollen mills, in
consequence of which a reduction of 70 short-timers had taken place.'
26


The following table shows the total result of the mechanical
improvements in the English cotton industry due to the American Civil
War.




Hence, between 1861 and 1868, 338 cotton factories disappeared, in
other words more productive machinery on a larger scale was
concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of capitalists. The
number of power-looms decreased by 20,663; but since their product
increased in the same period, an improved loom must have yielded more
than an old one. Lastly the number of spindles increased by 1,612,541,
while the number of operatives decreased by 50,505. The 'temporary'
misery inflicted on the workpeople by the cotton-crisis, was
heightened, and from being temporary made permanent, by the rapid and
persistent progress of machinery.

But machinery not only acts as a competitor who gets the better of the
workman, and is constantly on the point of making him superfluous. It
is also a power inimical to him, and as such capital proclaims it from
the roof tops and as such makes use of it. It is the most powerful
weapon for repressing strikes, those periodical revolts of the
working-class against the autocracy of capital.27 According to Gaskell,
the steam-engine was from the very first an antagonist of human power,
an antagonist that enabled the capitalist to tread under foot the
growing claims of the workmen, who threatened the newly born factory
system with a crisis.28 It would be possible to write quite a history
of the inventions, made since 1830, for the sole purpose of supplying
capital with weapons against the revolts of the working-class. At the
head of these in importance, stands the self-acting mule, because it
opened up a new epoch in the automatic system.29

Nasmyth, the inventor of the steam-hammer, gives the following evidence
before the Trades' Union Commission, with regard to the improvements
made by him in machinery and introduced in consequence of the
wide-spread and long strikes of the engineers in 1851.

'The characteristic feature of our modern mechanical improvements, is
the introduction of self-acting tool machinery. What every mechanical
workman has now to do, and what every boy can do, is not to work
himself but to superintend the beautiful labour of the machine. The
whole class of workmen that depend exclusively on their skill, is now
done away with. Formerly, I employed four boys to every mechanic.
Thanks to these new mechanical combinations, I have reduced the number
of grown-up men from 1,500 to 750. The result was a considerable
increase in my profits.'

Ure says of a machine used in calico printing:


'At length capitalists sought deliverance from this intolerable
bondage' 'in the resources of science, and were speedily re-instated in
their legitimate rule, that of the head over the inferior members.'


Speaking of an invention for dressing warps:

'Then the combined malcontents, who fancied themselves impregnably
entrenched behind the old lines of division of labour, found their
flanks turned and their defences rendered useless by the new mechanical
tactics, and were obliged to surrender at discretion.'

With regard to the invention of the self-acting mule, he says:

'A creation destined to restore order among the industrious classes....
This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that
when capital enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of
labour will always be taught docility.'30

Although Ure's work appeared 30 years ago, at a time when the factory
system was comparatively but little developed, it still perfectly
expresses the spirit of the factory, not only by its undisguised
cynicism, but also by the na√Øvet√© with which it blurts out the stupid
contradictions of the capitalist brain. For instance, after propounding
the 'doctrine' stated above, that capital, with the aid of science
taken into its pay, always reduces the refractory hand of labour to
docility, he grows indignant because

'it (physico-mechanical science) has been accused of lending itself to
the rich capitalist as an instrument for harassing the poor.'

After preaching a long sermon to show how advantageous the rapid
development of machinery is to the working-classes, he warns them, that
by their obstinacy and their strikes they hasten that development.

'Violent revulsions of this nature,' he says, 'display short-sighted
man in the contemptible character of a self-tormentor.'

A few pages before he states the contrary.

'Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions resulting
from erroneous views among the factory operatives, the factory system
would have been developed still more rapidly and beneficially for all
concerned.' Then he exclaims again: 'Fortunately for the state of
society in the cotton districts of Great Britain, the improvements in
machinery are gradual.' 'It' (improvement in machinery) 'is said to
lower the rate of earnings of adults by displacing a portion of them,
and thus rendering their number superabundant as compared with the
demand for their labour. It certainly augments the demand for the
labour of children and increases the rate of "their "wages.'

On the other hand, this same dispenser of consolation defends the
lowness of the children's wages on the ground that it prevents parents
from sending their children at too early an age into the factory. The
whole of his book is a vindication of a working day of unrestricted
length; that Parliament should forbid children of 13 years to be
exhausted by working 12 hours a day, reminds his liberal soul of the
darkest days of the Middle Ages. This does not prevent him from calling
upon the factory operatives to thank Providence, who by means of
machinery has given them the leisure to think of their 'immortal
interests.'31

=== Section 6: The Theory of Compensation as Regards the Workpeople
Displaced by Machinery == =

James Mill, MacCulloch, Torrens, Senior, John Stuart Mill, and a whole
series besides, of bourgeois political economists, insist that all
machinery that displaces workmen, simultaneously and necessarily sets
free an amount of capital adequate to employ the same identical
workmen. 32


Suppose a capitalist to employ 100 workmen, at Pounds 30 a year each,
in a carpet factory. The variable capital annually laid out amounts,
therefore, to Pounds 3,000. Suppose, also, that he discharges 50 of his
workmen, and employs the remaining 50 with machinery that costs him
Pounds 1,500. To simplify matters, we take no account of buildings,
coal, &c. Further suppose that the raw material annually consumed costs
Pounds 3,000, both before and after the change.33 Is any capital set
free by this metamorphosis? Before the change, the total sum of Pounds
6,000 consisted half of constant, and half of variable capital. After
the change it consists of Pounds 4,500 constant ( Pounds 3,000 raw
material and Pounds 1,500 machinery), and Pounds 1,500 variable
capital. The variable capital, instead of being one half, is only one
quarter, of the total capital. Instead of being set free, a part of the
capital is here locked up in such a way as to cease to be exchanged
against labour-power: variable has been changed into constant capital.
Other things remaining unchanged, the capital of Pounds 6,000, can, in
future, employ no more than 50 men. With each improvement in the
machinery, it will employ fewer. If the newly introduced machinery had
cost less than did the labour-power and implements displaced by it, if,
for instance, instead of costing Pounds 1,500, it had cost only Pounds
1,000, a variable capital of Pounds 1,000 would have been converted
into constant capital, and locked up; and a capital of Pounds 500 would
have been set free. The latter sum, supposing wages unchanged, would
form a fund sufficient to employ about 16 out of the 50 men discharged;
nay, less than 16, for, in order to be employed as capital, a part of
this Pounds 500 must now become constant capital, thus leaving only the
remainder to be laid out in labour-power.

But, suppose, besides, that the making of the new machinery affords
employment to a greater number of mechanics, can that be called
compensation to the carpet-makers, thrown on the streets? At the best,
its construction employs fewer men than its employment displaces. The
sum of Pounds 1,500 that formerly represented the wages of the
discharged carpet-makers, now represents in the shape of machinery: (1)
the value of the means of production used in the construction of that
machinery, (2) the wages of the mechanics employed in its construction,
and (3) the surplus value failing to the share of their 'master.'
Further, the machinery need not be renewed till it is worn out. Hence,
in order to keep the increased number of mechanics in constant
employment, one carpet manufacturer after another must displace workmen
by machines.

As a matter of fact the apologists do not mean this sort of setting
free.

They have in their minds the means of subsistence of the liberated
work-people. It cannot be denied, in the above instance, that the
machinery not only liberates 50 men, thus placing them at others'
disposal, but, at the same time, it withdraws from their consumption,
and sets free, means of subsistence to the value of Pounds 1,500. The
simple fact, by no means a new one, that machinery cuts off the workmen
from their means of subsistence is, therefore, in economic parlance
tantamount to this, that machinery liberates means of subsistence for
the workman, or converts those means into capital for his employment.
The mode of expression, you see, is everything. Nominibus mollire licet
mala.

This theory implies that the Pounds 1,500 worth of means of subsistence
was capital that was being expanded by the labour of the 50 men
discharged. That, consequently, this capital falls out of employment so
soon as they commence their forced holidays, and never rests till it
has found a fresh investment, where it can again be productively
consumed by these same 50 men. That sooner or later, therefore, the
capital and the workmen must come together again, and that, then, the
compensation is complete. That the sufferings of the workmen displaced
by machinery are therefore as transient as are the riches of this
world.

In relation to the discharged workmen, the Pounds 1,500 worth of means
of subsistence never was capital. What really confronted them as
capital, was the sum of Pounds 1,500, afterwards laid out in machinery.
On looking closer it will be seen that this sum represented part of the
carpets produced in a year by the 50 discharged men, which part they
received as wages from their employer in money instead of in kind. With
the carpets in the form of money, they bought means of subsistence to
the value of Pounds 1,500. These means, therefore, were to them, not
capital, but commodities, and they, as regards these commodities, were
not wage-labourers, but buyers. The circumstance that they were 'freed'
by the machinery, from the means of purchase, changed them from buyers
into non-buyers. Hence a lessened demand for those commodities --
voil√† tout. If this diminution be not compensated by an increase from
some other quarter, the market price of the commodities falls. If this
state of things lasts for some time, and extends, there follows a
discharge of workmen employed in the production of these commodities.
Some of the capital that was previously devoted to production of
necessary means of subsistence, has to become reproduced in another
form. While prices fall, and capital is being displaced, the labourers
employed in the production of necessary means of subsistence are in
their turn 'freed' from a part of their wages. Instead, therefore, of
proving that, when machinery frees the workman from his means of
subsistence, it simultaneously converts those means into capital for
his further employment, our apologists, with their cut-and-dried law of
supply and demand, prove, on the contrary, that machinery throws
workmen on the streets, not only in that branch of production in which
it is introduced, but also in those branches in which it is not
introduced.

The real facts, which are travestied by the optimism of economists, are
as follows: The labourers, when driven out of the workshop by the
machinery, are thrown upon the labour market, and there add to the
number of workmen at the disposal of the capitalists. In Part VII of
this book it will be seen that this effect of machinery, which, as we
have seen, is represented to be a compensation to the working class, is
on the contrary a most frightful scourge. For the present I will only
say this: The labourers that are thrown out of work in any branch of
industry, can no doubt seek for employment in some other branch. If
they find it, and thus renew the bond between them and the means of
subsistence, this takes place only by the intermediary of a new and
additional capital that is seeking investment; not at all by the
intermediary of the capital that formerly employed them and was
afterwards converted into machinery. And even should they find
employment, what a poor look-out is theirs! Crippled as they are by
division of labour, these poor devils are worth so little outside their
old trade, that they cannot find admission into any industries, except
a few of inferior kind, that are over-supplied with underpaid
workmen.34 Further, every branch of industry attracts each year a new
stream of men, who furnish a contingent from which to fill up
vacancies, and to draw a supply for expansion. So soon as machinery
sets free a part of the workmen employed in a given branch of industry,
the reserve men are also diverted into new channels of employment, and
become absorbed in other branches; meanwhile the original victims,
during the period of transition, for the most part starve and perish.

It is an undoubted fact that machinery, as such, is not responsible for
'setting free' the workman from the means of subsistence. It cheapens
and increases production in that branch which it seizes on, and at
first makes no change in the mass of the means of subsistence produced
in other branches. Hence, after its introduction, the society possesses
as much, if not more, of the necessaries of life than before, for the
labourers thrown out of work; and that quite apart from the enormous
share of the annual produce wasted by the non-workers. And this is the
point relied on by our apologists! The contradictions and antagonisms
inseparable from the capitalist employment of machinery, do not exist,
they say, since they do not arise out of machinery, as such, but out of
its capitalist employment! Since therefore machinery, considered alone,
shortens the hours of labour, but, when in the service of capital,
lengthens them; since in itself it lightens labour, but when employed
by capital, heightens the intensity of labour; since in itself it is a
victory of man over the forces of Nature, but in the hands of capital,
makes man the slave of those forces; since in itself it increases the
wealth of the producers, but in the hands of capital, makes them
paupers-for all these reasons and others besides, says the bourgeois
economist without more ado, it is clear as noon-day that all these
contradictions are a mere semblance of the reality, and that, as a
matter of fact, they have neither an actual nor a theoretical
existence. Thus he saves himself from all further puzzling of the
brain, and what is more, implicitly declares his opponent to be stupid
enough to contend against, not the capitalistic employment of
machinery, but machinery itself.

No doubt he is far from denying that temporary inconvenience may result
from the capitalist use of machinery. But where is the medal without
its reverse! Any employment of machinery, except by capital, is to him
an impossibility. Exploitation of the workman by the machine is
therefore, with him, identical with exploitation of the machine by the
workman. Whoever, therefore, exposes the real state of things in the
capitalistic employment of machinery, is against its employment in any
way, and is an enemy of social progress!35 Exactly the reasoning of the
celebrated Bill Sykes. 'Gentlemen of the jury, no doubt the throat of
this commercial traveller has been cut. But that is not my fault, it is
the fault of the knife. Must we, for such a temporary inconvenience,
abolish the use of the knife? Only consider! where would agriculture
and trade be without the knife? Is it not as salutary in surgery, as it
is knowing in anatomy? And in addition a willing help at the festive
board? If you abolish the knife -- you hurl us back into the depths of
barbarism.'36


Although machinery necessarily throws men out of work in those
industries into which it is introduced, yet it may, notwithstanding
this, bring about an increase of employment in other industries. This
effect, however, has nothing in common with the so-called theory of
compensation. Since every article produced by a machine is cheaper than
a similar article produced by hand, we deduce the following infallible
law: If the total quantity of the article produced by machinery, be
equal to the total quantity of the article previously produced by a
handicraft or by manufacture, and now made by machinery, then the total
labour expended is diminished. The new labour spent on the instruments
of labour, on the machinery, on the coal, and so on, must necessarily
be less than the labour displaced by the use of the machinery;
otherwise the product of the machine would be as dear, or dearer, than
the product of the manual labour. But, as a matter of fact, the total
quantity of the article produced by machinery with a diminished number
of workmen, instead of remaining equal to, by far exceeds the total
quantity of the hand-made article that has been displaced. Suppose that
400,000 yards of cloth have been produced on power-looms by fewer
weavers than could weave 100,000 yards by hand. In the quadrupled
product there lies four times as much raw material. Hence the
production of raw material must be quadrupled. But as regards the
instruments of labour, such as buildings, coal, machinery, and so on,
it is different; the limit up to which the additional labour required
for their production can increase, varies with the difference between
the quantity of the machine-made article, and the quantity of the same
article that the same number of workmen could make by hand.

Hence, as the use of machinery extends in a given industry, the
immediate effect is to increase production in the other industries that
furnish the first with means of production. How far employment is
thereby found for an increased number of men, depends, given the length
of the working day and the intensity of labour, on the composition of
the capital employed, i.e., on the ratio of its constant to its
variable component. This ratio, in its turn, varies considerably with
the extent to which machinery has already seized on, or is then seizing
on, those trades. The number of the men condemned to work in coal and
metal mines increased enormously owing to the progress of the English
factory system; but during the last few decades this increase of number
has been less rapid, owing to the use of new machinery in mining.37 A
new type of workman springs into life along with the machine, namely,
its maker. We have already learnt that machinery has possessed itself
even. of this branch of production on a scale that grows greater every
day.38 As to raw material,39 there is not the least doubt that the
rapid strides of cotton spinning, not only pushed on with tropical
luxuriance the growth of cotton in the United States, and with it the
African slave trade, but also made the breeding of slaves the chief
business of the border slave-states. When, in 1790, the first census of
slaves was taken in the United States, their number was 697,000; in
1861 it had nearly reached four millions. On the other hand, it is no
less certain that the rise of the English woollen factories, together
with the gradual conversion of arable land into sheep pasture, brought,
about the superfluity of agricultural labourers that led to their being
driven in masses into the towns. Ireland, having during the last twenty
years reduced its population by nearly one half, is at this moment
undergoing the process of still further reducing the number of its
inhabitants, so as exactly to suit the requirements of its landlords
and of the English woollen manufacturers.

When machinery is applied to any of the preliminary or intermediate
stages through which the subject of labour has to pass on its way to
completion, there is an increased yield of material in those stages,
and simultaneously an increased demand for labour in the handicrafts or
manufactures supplied by the produce of the machines. Spinning by
machinery, for example, supplied yarn so cheaply and so abundantly that
the hand-loom weavers were, at first, able to work full time without
increased outlay. Their earnings accordingly rose.40 Hence a flow of
people into the cotton-weaving trade, till at length the 800,000
weavers, called into existence by the Jenny, the throstle and the mule,
were overwhelmed by the power-loom. So also, owing to the abundance of
clothing materials produced by machinery, the number of tailors,
seamstresses and needlewomen, went on increasing until the appearance
of the sewing-machine.

In proportion as machinery, with the aid of a relatively small number
of workpeople, increases the mass of raw materials, intermediate
products, instruments of labour, &c., the working-up of these raw
materials and intermediate products becomes split up into numberless
branches; social production increases in diversity. The factory system
carries the social division of labour immeasurably further than does
manufacture, for it increases the productiveness of the industries it
seizes upon, in a far higher degree.

The immediate result of machinery is to augment surplus value and the
mass of products in which surplus value is embodied. And, as the
substances consumed by the capitalists and their dependents become more
plentiful, so too do these orders of society. Their growing wealth, and
the relatively diminished number of workmen required to produce the
necessaries of life beget, simultaneously with the rise of new and
luxurious wants, the means of satisfying those wants. A larger portion
of the produce of society is changed into surplus-produce, and a larger
part of the surplus-produce is supplied for consumption in a
multiplicity of refined shapes. In other words, the production of
luxuries increases.41 The refined and varied forms of the products are
also due to new relations with the markets of the world, relations that
are created by modern industry. Not only are greater quantities of
foreign articles of luxury exchanged for home products, but a greater
mass of foreign raw materials, ingredients, and intermediate products,
are used as means of production in the home industries. Owing to these
relations with the markets of the world, the demand for labour
increases in the carrying trades, which split up into numerous
varieties.42

The increase of the means of production and subsistence, accompanied by
a relative diminution in the number of labourers, causes an increased
demand for labour in making canals, docks, tunnels, bridges, and so on,
works that can only bear fruit in the far future. Entirely new branches
of production, creating new fields of labour, are also formed, as the
direct result either of machinery or of the general industrial changes
brought about by it. But the place occupied by these branches in the
general production is, even in the most developed countries, far from
important. The number of labourers that find employment in them is
directly proportional to the demand, created by those industries, for
the crudest form of manual labour. The chief industries of this kind
are, at present, gas-works, telegraphs, photography, steam navigation,
and railways. According to the census of 1861 for England and Wales, we
find in the gas industry (gas-works, production of mechanical
apparatus, servants of . the gas companies, &c), 15,211 persons; in
telegraphy, 2,399; in photography, 2,366; steam navigation, 3,570; and
in railways, 70,599, of whom the unskilled 'navvies,' more or less
permanently employed, and the whole administrative and commercial
staff, make up about 28,000. The total number of persons, therefore,
employed in these five new industries amounts to 94,145.

Lastly, the extraordinary productiveness of modern industry,
accompanied as it is by both a more extensive and a more intense
exploitation of labour-power in all other spheres of production, allows
of the unproductive employment of a larger and larger part of the
working-class, and the consequent reproduction, on a constantly
extending scale, of the ancient domestic slaves under the name of a
servant class, including men-servants, women-servants, lackeys, &c.
According to the census of 1861, the population of England and Wales
was 20,066,244; of these, 9,776,259 males, and 10,289,965 females. If
we deduct from this population all who are too old or too young for
work, all unproductive women, young persons and children, the
'ideological' classes, such as government officials, priests, lawyers,
soldiers, &c.; further, all who have no occupation but to consume the
labour of others in the form of rent, interest, &c.; and, lastly,
paupers, vagabonds, and criminals, there remain in round numbers eight
millions of the two sexes of every age, including in that number every
capitalist who is in any way engaged in industry, commerce, or finance.
Among these 8 millions are:




All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, taken
together, number 1,208,442; those employed in textile factories and
metal industries, taken together, number 1,039,605; in both cases less
than the number of modern domestic slaves. What a splendid result of
the capitalist exploitation of machinery!

=== Section 7: Repulsion and Attraction of Workpeople by the Factory
System. Crises in the Cotton Trade == =

All political economists of any standing admit that the introduction of
new machinery has a baneful effect on the workmen in the old
handicrafts and manufactures with which this machinery at first
competes. Almost all of them bemoan the slavery of the factory
operative. And what is the great trump-card that they play? That
machinery, after the horrors of the period of introduction and
development have subsided, instead of diminishing, in the long run
increases the number of the slaves of labour! Yes, Political Economy
revels in the hideous theory, hideous to every 'philanthropist' who
believes in the eternal Nature-ordained necessity for capitalist
production, that after a period of growth and transition, even its
crowning success, the factory system based on machinery, grinds down
more workpeople than on its first introduction it throws on the
streets.46


It is true that in some cases, as we saw from instances of English
worsted and silk factories, an extraordinary extension of the factory
system may, at a certain stage of its development, be accompanied not
only by a relative, but by an absolute decrease in the number of
operatives employed. In the year 1860, when a special census of all the
factories in the United Kingdom was taken by order of Parliament, the
factories in those parts of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire,
included in the district of Mr. Baker, the factory inspector, numbered
652; 570 of these contained 85,622 power-looms, 6,819,146 spindles
(exclusive of doubling spindles), employed 27,439 horse-power (steam),
and 1,390 (water), and 94,119 persons. In the year 1865, the same
factories contained, looms 95,163, spindles 7,025,031, had a
steam-power of 28,925 horses, and a water-power of 1,445 horses, and
employed 88,913 persons. Between 1860 and 1865, therefore, the increase
in looms was 11%, in spindles 3%, and in engine-power 3%, while
the number of persons employed decreased 5 1/2%.47 Between 1852 and
1862, considerable extension of the English woollen manufacture took
place, while the number of hands employed in it remained almost
stationary, 'showing how greatly the introduction of new machines had
superseded the labour of preceding periods.'48

In certain cases, the increase in the number of hands employed is only
apparent; that is, it is not due to the extension of the factories
already established, but to the gradual annexation of connected trades;
for instance, the increase in power-looms, and in the hands employed by
them between 1838 and 1856, was, in the cotton trade, simply owing to
the extension of this branch of industry; but in the other trades to
the application of steam-power to the carpet-loom, to the ribbon-loom,
and to the linen-loom, which previously had been worked by the power of
men.49 Hence the increase of the hands in these latter trades was
merely a symptom of a diminution in the total number employed. Finally,
we have considered this question entirely apart from the fact, that
everywhere, except in the metal industries, young persons (under 18),
and women and children form the preponderating element in the class of
factory hands.

Nevertheless, in spite of the mass of hands actually displaced and
virtually replaced by machinery, we can understand how the factory
operatives, through the building of more mills and the extension of old
ones in a given industry, may become more numerous than the
manufacturing workmen and handicraftsman that have been displaced.
Suppose, for example, that in the old mode of production, a capital of
Pounds 500 is employed weekly, two-fifths being constant and
three-fifths variable capital, "i.e.", Pounds 200 being laid out in
means of production, and Pounds 300, say Pounds 1 per man, in
labour-power. On the introduction of machinery the composition of this
capital becomes altered. We will suppose it to consist of four-fifths
constant and one-fifth variable, which means that only Pounds 100 is
now laid out in labour-power. Consequently, two-thirds of the workmen
are discharged. If now the business extends, and the total capital
employed grows to Pounds 1,500 under unchanged conditions, the number
of operatives employed will increase to 300, just as many as before the
introduction of the machinery. If the capital further grows to Pounds
2,000, 400 men will be employed, or one-third more than under the old
system. Their numbers have, in point of fact, increased by 100, but
relatively, i.e., in proportion to the total capital advanced, they
have diminished by 800, for the Pounds 2,000 capital would, in the old
state of things, have employed 1,200 instead of 400 men. Hence, a
relative decrease in the number of hands is consistent with an actual
increase. We assumed above that while the total capital increases, its
composition remains the same, because the conditions of production
remain constant. But we have already seen that, with every advance in
the use of machinery, the constant component of capital, that part
which consists of machinery, raw material, &c., increases, while the
variable component, the part laid out in labour-power, decreases. We
also know that in no, other system of production is improvement so
continuous, and the composition of the capital employed so constantly
changing as in the factory system. These changes are, however,
continually interrupted by periods of rest, during which there is a
mere quantitative extension of the factories on the existing technical
basis. During such periods the operatives increase in number.. Thus, in
1835, the total number of operatives in the cotton, woollen, worsted,
flax, and silk factories of the United Kingdom was only 354,684; while
in 1861 the number of the power-loom weavers alone (of both sexes and
of all ages, from eight years upwards), amounted to 230,654. Certainly,
this growth appears less important when we consider that in 1838 the
hand-loom weavers with their families still numbered 800,000,50 not to
mention those thrown out of work in Asia, and on the Continent of
Europe.

In the few remarks I have still to make on this point, I shall refer to
some actually existing relations, the existence of which our
theoretical investigation has not yet disclosed.

So long as, in a given branch of industry, the factory system extends
itself at the expense of the old handicrafts or of manufacture, the
result is as sure as is the result of an encounter between an army
furnished with breach-loaders, and one armed with bows and arrows. This
first period, during which machinery conquers its field of action, is
of decisive importance owing to the extraordinary profits that it helps
to produce. These profits not only form a source of accelerated
accumulation, but also attract into the favoured sphere of production a
large part of the additional social capital that is being constantly
created, and is ever on the look-out for new investments. The special
advantages of this first period of fast and furious activity are felt
in every branch of production that machinery invades. So soon, however,
as the factory system has gained a certain breadth of footing and a
definite degree of maturity, and, especially, so soon as its technical
basis, machinery, is itself produced by machinery; so soon as coal
mining and iron mining, the metal industries, and the means of
transport have been revolutionised; so soon, in short, as the general
conditions requisite for production by the modern industrial system
have been established, this mode of production acquires an elasticity,
a capacity for sudden extension by leaps and bounds that finds no
hindrance except in the supply of raw material and in the disposal of
the produce. On the one hand, the immediate effect of machinery is to
increase the supply of raw material in the same way, for example, as
the cotton gin augmented the production of cotton.51 On the other hand,
the cheapness of the articles produced by machinery, and the improved
means of transport and communication furnish the weapons for conquering
foreign markets. By ruining handicraft production in other countries,
machinery forcibly converts them into fields for the supply of its raw
material. In this way East India was compelled to produce cotton, wool,
hemp, jute, and indigo for Great Britain.52 By constantly making a part
of the hands 'supernumerary,' modern industry, in all countries where
it has taken root, gives a spur to emigration and to the colonisation
of foreign lands, which are thereby converted into settlements for
growing the raw material of the mother country; just as Australia, for
example, was converted into a colony for growing wool.53 A new and
international division of labour, a division suited to the requirements
of the chief centres of modern industry springs up, and converts one
part of the globe into a chiefly agricultural field of production, for
supplying the other part which remains a chiefly industrial field. This
revolution hangs together with radical changes in agriculture which we
need not here further inquire into.54

On the motion of Mr. Gladstone, the House of Commons ordered, on the
17th February, 1867, a return of the total quantities of grain, corn,
and flour, of all sorts, imported into, and exported from, the United
Kingdom, between the years 1831 and 1866. I give below a summary of the
result. The flour is given in quarters of corn. (See the Table on p.
42.6.)




The enormous power, inherent in the factory system, of expanding by
jumps, and the dependence of that system on the markets of the world,
necessarily beget feverish production, followed by over-filling of the
markets, whereupon contraction of the markets brings on crippling of
production. The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of
moderate activity, prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation.
The uncertainty and instability to which machinery subjects the
employment, and consequently the conditions of existence, of the
operatives become normal, owing to these periodic changes of the
industrial cycle. Except in the periods of prosperity, there rages
between the capitalists the most furious combat for the share of each
in the markets. This share is directly proportional to the cheapness of
the. product. Besides the rivalry that this struggle begets in the
application of improved machinery for replacing labour-power, and of
new methods of production, there also comes a time in every industrial
cycle, when a forcible reduction of wages beneath the value of
labour-power, is attempted for the purpose of cheapening commodities.55


A necessary condition, therefore, to the growth of the number of
factory hands, is a proportionally much more rapid growth of the amount
of capital invested in mills. This growth, however, is conditioned by
the ebb and flow of the industrial cycle. It is, besides, constantly
interrupted by the technical progress that at one time virtually
supplies the place of new workmen, at another, actually displaces old
ones. This qualitative change in mechanical industry continually
discharges hands from the factory, or shuts its doors against the fresh
stream of recruits, while the purely quantitative extension of the
factories absorbs not only the men thrown out of work, but also fresh
contingents. The workpeople are thus continually both repelled and
attracted, hustled from pillar to post, while, at the same time,
constant changes take place in the sex, age, and skill of the levies.

The lot of the factory operatives will be best depicted by taking a
rapid survey of the course of the English cotton industry.

From 1770 to 1815 this trade was depressed or stagnant for 5 years
only. During this period of 45 years the English manufacturers had a
monopoly of machinery and of the markets of the world. From 1815 to
1821 depression; 1822 and 1823 prosperity; 1824 abolition of the laws
against Trades' Unions, great extension of factories everywhere; 1825
crisis; 1826 great misery and riots among the factory operatives; 1827
slight improvement; 1828 great increase in power-looms, and in exports;
1829 exports, especially to India, surpass all former years; 1830
glutted markets, great distress; 1831 to 1833 continued depression, the
monopoly of the trade with India and China withdrawn from the, East
India Company; 1834 great increase of factories and machinery,
shortness of hands. The new poor law furthers the migration of
agricultural labourers into the factory districts. The country
districts swept of children. White slave trade; 1835 great prosperity,
contemporaneous starvation of the hand-loom weavers; 1836 great
prosperity; 1837 and 1838 depression and crisis; 1839 revival; 1840
great depression, riots, calling out of the military; 1841 and 1842
frightful suffering among the factory operatives; 1842 the
manufacturers lock the hands out of the factories in order to enforce
the repeal of the Corn Laws. The operatives stream in thousands into
the towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, are driven back by the military,
and their leaders brought to trial at Lancaster; 1843 great misery;
1844 revival; 1845 great prosperity; 1846 continued improvement at
first, then reaction. Repeal of the Corn Laws; 1847 crisis, general
reduction of wages by 10 and more per cent. in honour of the 'big
loaf"; 1848 continued depression; Manchester under military.
protection; 1849 revival; 1850 prosperity; 1851 falling prices, low
wages, frequent strikes; 1852 improvement begins, strikes continue, the
manufacturers threaten to import foreign hands; 1853 increasing
exports. Strike for 8 months, and great misery at Preston; 1854
prosperity, glutted markets; 1855 news of failures stream in from the
United States, Canada, and the Eastern markets; 1856 great prosperity;
1857 crisis; 1858 improvement; 1859 great prosperity, increase in
factories; 1860 Zenith of the English cotton trade, the Indian,
Australian, and other markets so glutted with goods that even in 1863
they had not absorbed the whole lot; the French Treaty of Commerce,
enormous growth of factories and machinery; 1861 prosperity continues
for a time, reaction, the American Civil War, cotton famine: 1862 to
1863 complete collapse.

The history of the cotton famine is too characteristic to dispense with
dwelling upon it for a moment. From the indications as to the condition
of the markets of the world in 1860 and 1861, we see that the cotton
famine came in the nick of time for the manufacturers, and was to some
extent advantageous to them, a fact that was acknowledged in the
reports of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, proclaimed in Parliament
by Palmerston and Derby, and confirmed by events.56 No doubt, among the
2,887 cotton mills in the United Kingdom in 1861, there were many of
small size. According to the report of Mr. A. Redgrave, out of the
2,109 mills included in his district, 392, or 19% employed less than
ten horse-power each; 345, or 16% employed 10 H. P., and less than 20
H. P.; while 1,372 employed upwards of 20 H. P.57 The majority of the
small mills were weaving sheds, built during the period of prosperity
after 1858, for the most part by speculators, of whom one supplied the
yarn, another the machinery, a third the buildings, and were worked by
men who had been overlookers, or by other persons of small means. These
small manufacturers mostly went to the wall. The same fate would have
overtaken them in the commercial crisis that was staved off only by the
cotton famine. Although they formed one-third of the total number of
manufacturers, yet their mills absorbed a much smaller part of the
capital invested in the cotton trade. As to the extent of the stoppage,
it appears from authentic estimates, that in October 1862, 60.3% of
the spindles, and 58% of the looms were standing. This refers to the
cotton trade as a whole, and, of course, requires considerable
modification for individual districts. Only very few mills worked full
time (60 hours a week), the remainder worked at intervals. Even in
those few cases where full time was worked, and at the customary rate
of piece-wage, the weekly wages of the operatives necessarily shrank,
owing to good cotton being replaced by bad, Sea Island by Egyptian (in
fine spinning mills), American and Egyptian by Surat, and pure cotton
by mixings of waste and Surat. The shorter fibre of the Surat cotton
and its dirty condition, the greater fragility of the thread, the
substitution of all sorts of heavy ingredients for flour in sizing the
warps, all these lessened the speed of the machinery, or the number of
the looms that could be superintended by one weaver, increased the
labour caused by defects in the machinery, and reduced the piece-wage
by reducing the mass of the product turned off. Where Surat cotton was
used, the loss to the operatives when on full time, amounted to 20, 30,
and more per cent. But besides this, the majority of the manufacturers
reduced the rate of piece-wage by 5, 7 1/2, and 10 per cent. We can
therefore conceive the situation of those hands who were employed for
only 3, 3 1/2 or 4 days a week, or for only 6 hours a day. Even in 1863,
after a comparative improvement had set in, the weekly wages of
spinners and of weavers were 3s. 4d., 3s. 10d., 4s. 6d. and 5s. 1d.58
Even in this miserable state of things, however, the inventive spirit
of the master never stood still, but was exercised in making deductions
from wages. These were to some extent inflicted as a penalty for
defects in the finished article that were really due to his bad cotton
and to his unsuitable machinery. Moreover, where the manufacturer owned
the cottages of the workpeople, he paid himself his rents by deducting
the amount from these miserable Wages. Mr. Redgrave tells us of
self-acting minders (operatives who manage a pair of self-acting mules)
'earning at the end of a fortnight's full work 8s. 11d., and that from
this sum was deducted the rent of the house, the manufacturer, however,
returning half the rent as a gift. The minders took away the sum of 6s.
11d. In many places the self-acting minders ranged from 5s. to 9s. per
week, and the weavers from 2s. to 6s. per week, during the latter part
of 1862.'59


Even when working short time the rent was frequently deducted from the
wages of the operatives.60 No wonder that in some parts of Lancashire a
kind of famine fever broke out. But more characteristic than all this,
was, the revolution that took place in the process of production at the
expense of the workpeople. Experimenta in corpore vili, like those of
anatomists on frogs, were formally made.

'Although,' says Mr. Redgrave, 'I have given the actual earnings of the
operatives in the several mills, it does not follow that they earn the
same amount week by week. The operatives are subject to great
fluctuation from the constant experimentalising of the manufacturers
... the earnings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of
the cotton mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent. of
former earnings, and then, in a week or two, they have fallen off from
50 to 60 per cent.'61

These experiments were not made solely at the expense of the workman's
means of subsistence. His five senses also had to pay the penalty.

'The people who are employed in making up Surat cotton complain very
much. They inform me, on opening the bales of cotton there is an
intolerable smell, which causes sickness.... In the mixing, scribbling
and carding rooms, the dust and dirt which are disengaged, irritate the
air passages, and give rise to cough and difficulty of breathing. A
disease of the skin, no doubt from the irritation of the dirt contained
in the Surat cotton, also prevails.... The fibre being so short, a
great amount of size, both animal and vegetable, is used.... Bronchitis
is more prevalent owing to the dust. Inflammatory sore throat is
common, from the same cause. Sickness and dyspepsia are produced by the
frequent breaking of the weft, when the weaver sucks the weft through
the eye of the shuttle.' On the other hand, the substitutes for flour
were a Fortunatus' purse to the manufacturers, by increasing the weight
of the yarn. They caused '15 lbs. of raw material to weigh 26 lbs.
after it was woven.'62

In the Report of Inspectors of Factories for 30th April, 1864, we read
as follows:

'The trade is availing itself of this resource at present to an extent
which is even discreditable. I have heard on good authority of a cloth
weighing 8 lbs. which was made of 5 1/4 lbs. cotton and 2 3/4 lbs.
size; and of another cloth weighing 5 1/4 lbs., of which 2 lbs. was
size. These were ordinary export shirtings. In cloths of other
descriptions, as much as 50 per cent. size is sometimes added; so that
a manufacturer may, and does truly boast, that he is getting rich by
selling cloth for less money per pound than he paid for the mere yarn
of which they are composed.' 63


But the workpeople had to suffer, not only from the experiments of the
manufacturers inside the mills, and of the municipalities outside, not
only from reduced wages and absence of work, from want and from
charity, and from the eulogistic speeches of lords and commons.

'Unfortunate females who, in consequence of the cotton famine, were at
its commencement thrown out of employment, and have thereby become
outcasts of society; and now, though trade has revived, and work is
plentiful, continue members of that unfortunate class, and are likely
to continue so. There are also in the borough more youthful prostitutes
than I have known for the last 25 years.' 64


We find then, in the first 45 years of the English cotton trade, from
1770 to 1815, only 5 years of crisis and stagnation; but this was the
period of monopoly. The second period from 1815 to 1863 counts, during
its 48 years, only 20 years of revival and prosperity against 28 of
depression and stagnation. Between 1815 and 1830 the competition with
the continent of Europe and with the United States sets in. After 1833,
the extension of the Asiatic markets is enforced by 'destruction of the
human race' (the wholesale extinction of Indian hand-loom weavers).
After the repeal of the Corn Laws, from 1846 to 1863, there are 8 years
of moderate activity and prosperity against 9 years of depression and
stagnation. The condition of the adult male operatives, even during the
years of prosperity, may be judged from the note subjoined.65


=== Section 8: Revolution Effected in Manufacture, Handicrafts, and
Domestic Industry by Modern Industry == =

==== A. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft and on the
Division of Labour === =

We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on
handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the division of handicraft
labour. An example of the first sort is the mowing-machine; it replaces
co-operation between mowers. A striking example of the second kind, is
the needle-making machine. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day,
made in co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day. On the other hand, a
single needle-machine makes 145,000 in a working day of 11 hours. One
woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so produces near
upon 600,000 needles in a day, and upwards of 3,000,000 in a week.66 A
single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of
manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a
handicraft character. Still, such a return to handicrafts is but a
transition to the factory system, which, as a rule, makes its
appearance so soon as the human muscles are replaced, for the purpose
of driving the machines, by a mechanical motive power, such as steam or
water. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may
be carried on, on a small scale, by means of mechanical power. This is
effected by hiring steam-power, as is done in some of the Birmingham
trades, or by the use of small caloric-engines, as in some branches of
weaving.67 In the Coventry silk weaving industry the experiment of
'cottage factories' was tried. In the centre of a square surrounded by
rows of cottages, an engine-house was built and the engine connected by
shafts with the looms in the cottages. In all cases the power was hired
at so much per loom. The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms
worked or not. Each cottage held from 2 to 6 looms; some belonged to
the weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. The struggle
between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted over 12
years. It ended with the complete ruin of the 300 cottage factories.68
Wherever the nature of the process did not involve production on a
large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few
decades, such as envelope making, steel-pen making, &c., have, as a
general rule, first passed through the handicraft stage, and then the
manufacturing stage, as short phases of transition to the factory
stage. The transition is very difficult in those cases where the
production of the article by manufacture consists, not of a series of
graduated processes, but of a great number of disconnected ones. This
circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of steel-pen
factories. Nevertheless, about 15 years ago, a machine was invented
that automatically performed 6 separate operations at once. The first
steel-pens were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at
Pounds 7 4s. the gross; in 1830 they-were supplied by manufacture at
8s., and today the factory system supplies them to the trade at from 2
to 6d. the gross.69

==== B. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic
Industries === =

Along with the development of the factory system and of the revolution
in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other
branches of industry not only extends, but alters its character. The
principle, carried out in the factory system, of analysing the process
of production into its constituent phases, and of solving the problems
thus proposed by the application of mechanics, of chemistry, and of the
whole range of the natural sciences, becomes the determining principle
everywhere. Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing
industries first for one detail process, then for another. Thus the
solid crystal of their organisation, based on the old division of
labour, becomes dissolved, and makes way for constant changes.
Independently of this, a radical change takes place in the composition
of the collective labourer, a change of the persons working in
combination. In contrast with the manufacturing period, the division of
labour is thenceforth based, wherever possible, on the employment of
women, of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one
word, on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in England.
This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, whether
employing machinery or not, but also with the so-called domestic
industry, whether carried on in the houses of the workpeople or in
small workshops. This modern so-called domestic industry has nothing,
except the name, in common with the old-fashioned domestic industry,
the existence of which pre-supposes independent urban handicrafts,
independent peasant farming, and above all, a dwelling-house for the
labourer and his family. That old-fashioned industry has now been
converted into an outside department of the factory, the manufactory,
or the warehouse. Besides the factory operatives, the manufacturing
workmen and the handicraftsman, whom it concentrates in large masses at
one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets in motion, by means,
of invisible threads, another army; that of the workers in the domestic
industries, who dwell in the large towns and -are also scattered over
the face of the country. An example: The shirt factory of Messrs.
Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1,000 operatives in the factory
itself, and 9,000 people spread up and down the country and working in
their own houses.70

The exploitation of cheap and immature labour-power is carried out in a
more shameless manner in modern Manufacture than in the factory proper.
This is because the technical foundation of the factory system, namely,
the substitution of machines for muscular power, and the light
character of the labour, is almost entirely absent in Manufacture, and
at the same time women and over-young children are subjected, in a most
unconscionable way, to the influence of poisonous or injurious
substances. This exploitation is more shameless in the so-called
domestic industry than in manufactures, and that because the power of
resistance in the labourers decreases with their dissemination; because
a whole series of plundering parasites insinuate themselves between the
employer and the workman; because a domestic industry has always to
compete either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the
same branch of production; because poverty robs the workman of the
conditions most essential to his labour, of space, light and
ventilation; because employment becomes more and more irregular; and,
finally, because in these the last resorts of the masses made
'redundant' by modern industry and Agriculture, competition for work
attains its maximum. Economy in the means of production, first
systematically carried out in the factory system, and there, from the
very beginning, coincident with the most reckless squandering of
labour-power, and robbery of the conditions normally requisite for
labour -- this economy now shows its antagonistic and murderous side
more and more in a given branch of industry, the less the social
productive power of labour and the technical basis for a combination of
processes are developed in that branch.

==== C. Modern Manufacture === =

I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles laid
down above. As a matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with
numerous instances given in the chapter on the working day. In the
hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neighbourhood, there are
employed, mostly in very heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons,
besides 10,000 women. There they are to be seen in the unwholesome
brass-foundries, button factories, enamelling, galvanising, and
lackering works.71 Owing to the excessive labour of their workpeople,
both adult and non-adult, certain London houses where newspapers and
books are printed, have got the ill-omened name of 'slaughterhouses.'72
Similar excesses are practised in book-binding, where the victims are
chiefly women, girls, and children; young persons have to do heavy work
in rope-walks and night-work in salt mines, candle manufactories, and
chemical works; young people are worked to death at turning the looms
in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by machinery.73 One of the
most shameful, the most dirty, and the worst paid kinds of labour, and
one on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the
sorting of rags. It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its
own immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the
whole world. They flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of
South America, and from the Canary Islands. But the chief sources of
their supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey,
Belgium, and Holland. They are used for manure, for making bedflocks,
for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. The
rag-sorters are the medium for the spread of small-pox and other
infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims.74 A
classical example of over-work, of hard and inappropriate labour, and
of its brutalising effects on the workman from his childhood upwards,
is afforded not only by coal-mining and miners generally, but also by
tile and brick making, in which industry the recently invented
machinery is, in England, used only here and there. Between May and
September the work lasts from 5 in the morning till 8 in the evening,
and where the drying is done in the open air, it often lasts from 4 in
the morning till 9 in the evening. Work from 5 in the morning till 7 in
the evening is considered 'reduced' and 'moderate.' Both boys and girls
of 6 and even of 4 years of age are employed. They work for the same
number of hours, often longer, than the adults. The work is hard and
the summer heat increases the exhaustion. In a certain tile-field at
Mosley, e.g., a young woman, 24 years of age, was in the habit of
making 2,000 tiles a day, with the assistance of 2 little girls, who
carried the clay for her, and stacked the tiles. These girls carried
daily 10 tons up the slippery sides of the clay pits, from a depth of
30 feet, and then for a distance of 210 feet.

'It is impossible for a child to pass through the purgatory of a
tile-field without great moral degradation... the low language, which
they are accustomed to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy,
indecent, and shameless habits, amidst which, unknowing, and half wild,
they grow up, make them in after-life lawless, abandoned, dissolute....
A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living. Each
moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group,
supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottages
Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls all
sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exceptionally 3
rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. These people are
so exhausted after the day's hard work, that neither the rules of
health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed. Many
of these cottages are models of untidiness, dirt, and dust.... The
greatest evil of the system that employs young girls on this sort of
work, consists in this, that, as a rule, it chains them fast from
childhood for the whole of their after-life to the most abandoned
rabble. They become rough, foul-mouthed boys, before Nature has taught
them that they are women. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked
far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to
treat all feelings of decency and of shame with contempt. During
meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys
bathing in a neighbouring canal. Their heavy day's work at length
completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the
public houses.'

That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among the
whole of this class, is only natural.

'The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves. You might as
well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try
to raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!'75

As to the manner, in which capital effects an economy in the requisites
of labour, in modern Manufacture (in which I include all workshops of
larger size, except factories proper), official and most ample material
bearing on it is to be found in the Public Health Reports IV. (1863)
and VI. (1864). The description of the Workshops, more especially those
of the London printers and tailors, surpasses the most loathsome
phantasies of our romance writers- The effect on the health of the
workpeople is self-evident. Dr. Simon, the chief medical officer of the
Privy Council and the official editor of the 'Public Health Reports,'
says:

'In my fourth Report (1863) I showed, how it is practically impossible
for the workpeople to insist upon that which is their first sanitary
right, viz., the right that, no matter what the work for which their
employer brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon
him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. I
pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically incapable of
doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to obtain any
effective support from the paid administrations of the sanitary
police.... The life of myriads of workmen and workwomen is now
uselessly tortured and shortened by the never-ending physical suffering
that their mere occupation begets.'76

In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state
of health Dr. Simon gives the following table of mortality.77




|
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 London tailors |
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 958

|
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 1,262

|
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 2,093


|- |
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 13,803

|
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 |
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 London printers |
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 894

|
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 1,747

|
style="border:none;padding-top:0cm;padding-bottom:0cm;padding-left:0.191cm;padding-right:0.191cm;"|
 2,367


|} ==== D. Modern Domestic Industry === =

I now come to the so-called domestic industry. In order to get an idea
of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its
exploitation in the background of modern mechanical industry, one must
go to the apparently quite idyllic trade of nail-making,78 carried on
in a few remote villages of England. In this place, however, it will be
enough to give a few examples from those branches of the lace-making
and straw-plaiting industries that are not yet carried on by the aid of
machinery, and that as yet do not compete with branches carried on in
factories or in manufactories.

Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the production of lace,
about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Factory Act, 1861. Almost
the whole of the remaining 140,000 are women, young persons, and
children of both sexes, the male sex, however, being weakly
represented. The state of health of this cheap material for
exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr.
Trueman, physician to the Nottingham General Dispensary. Out of 686
female patients who were lace-makers, most of them between the ages of
17 and 24, the number of consumptive ones were:




This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most
optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the
Free-trade bagmen of Germany.

The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far
as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England. The
branches that we are now about to examine, solely with regard to those
of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in
manufactories or warehouses, fall into two divisions, viz. (1),
finishing; (2), mending. The former gives the finishing touches to the
machine-made lace, and includes numerous sub-divisions.

The lace finishing is done either in what are called 'mistresses'
houses,' or by women in their own houses, with or without the help of
their children. The women who keep the 'mistresses' houses' are
themselves poor. The workroom is in a private house. The mistresses
take orders from manufacturers, or from warehousemen, and employ as
many women, girls, and young children as the size of their rooms and
the fluctuating demand of the business will allow. The number of the
workwomen employed in these workrooms varies from 20 to 40 in some, and
from 10 to 20 in others. The average age at which the children commence
work is six years, but in many cases it is below five. The usual
working-hours are from 8 in the morning till eight in the evening, with
1 1/2 hours for meals, which are taken at irregular intervals, and often
in the foul workrooms. When business is brisk, the labour frequently
lasts from 8 or even 6 o'clock in the morning till 10, 11, or 12
o'clock at night. In English barracks the regulation space allotted to
each soldier is 500-600 cubic feet, and in the military hospitals 1,200
cubic feet. But in those finishing sties there are but 67 to 100 cubic
feet to each person. At the same time the oxygen of the air is consumed
by gas-lights. In order to keep the lace clean, and although the floor
is tiled or gagged, the children are often compelled, even in winter,
to pull off their shoes.

'It is not at all uncommon in Nottingham to find 14 to 20 children
huddled together in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet
square, and employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself
is exhausting, from its weariness and monotony, and is besides carried
on under every possible unwholesome condition.... Even the very
youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is
astonishing, hardly ever giving their fingers rest or glowering their
motion. If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from
their work from fear of losing a single moment.'

The 'long stick' is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more
as the working hours are prolonged.

'The children gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards
the end of their long detention at an occupation that is monotonous,
eye-straining, and exhausting from the uniformity in the posture of the
body. Their work is like slavery.' 80


When women and their children work at home, which now-a-days means in a
hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possible,
still worse. This sort of work is given out within a circle of 80 miles
radius from Nottingham. On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10 o'clock at
night, the children are often given a bundle of lace to take home with
them and finish. The Pharisee of a capitalist represented by one of his
servants, accompanies this action, of course, with the unctuous phrase:
'That's for mother,' yet he knows well enough that the poor children
must sit up and help.81

Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricultural
districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30
miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places
in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of
Buckingham, Bedford, and Northampton, and also the adjoining portions
of Oxfordshire and Huntingdonshire. The cottages of the agricultural
labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. Many
manufacturers employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace-makers, who are
chiefly children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. The
state of things described as incidental to lace finishing is here
repeated, save that instead of the 'mistresses' houses,' we find what
are called 'lace-schools,' kept by poor women in their cottages. From
their fifth year and often earlier, until their twelfth or fifteenth
year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the
very young ones work from four to eight hours, and later on, from six
in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night.

'The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cottages,
the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by
their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in winter. In other
cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small store-rooms without
fire-places.... The over-crowding in these dens and the consequent
vitiation of the air are often extreme. Added to this is the injurious
effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth
usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages.' With regard to space:
'In one lace-school 18 girls and a mistress, 35 cubic feet to each
person; in another, where the smell was unbearable, 18 persons and
24 1/2 cubic feet per head. In this industry are to be found employed
children of 2 and 2 1/2 years.'82

Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bedford,
straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertfordshire
and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. In 1861, there were
40,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat making; of
these 3,815 were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913,
including about 7,000 children, were under 20 years of age. In the
place of the lace-schools we find here the 'straw-plait schools.' The
children commence their instruction in straw-plaiting generally in
their 4th, often between their 3rd and 4th year. Education, of course,
they get none. The children themselves call the elementary schools,
'natural schools,' to distinguish them from these blood-sucking
institutions, in which they are kept at work simply to get through the
task, generally 30 yards daily, prescribed by their half-starved
mothers. These same mothers often make them work at home, after school
is over, till 10, 11, and 12 o'clock at night. The straw cuts their
mouths, with which they constantly moisten it, and their fingers. Dr.
Ballard gives it as the general opinion of the whole body of medical
officers in London, that 300 cubic feet is the minimum space proper for
each person in a bedroom or workroom. But in the straw-plait schools
space is more sparingly allotted than in the lace-schools, '12 2/3, 17,
18 1/2 and below 22 cubic feet for each person.'

'The smaller of these numbers, says one of the commissioners, Mr.
White, represents less space than the half of what a child would occupy
if packed in a box measuring 3 feet in each direction.'

Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. The wretched
half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much as possible
out of their children. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not
care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, and leave them.

'It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so
brought up.... Their morality is at the lowest ebb,... a great number
of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature
age that even those most conversant with criminal statistics are
astounded.'83

And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian
country for Europe; so says at least Count Montalembert, certainly a
competent authority on Christianity!

Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maximum wages
of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3
shillings), are reduced far below their nominal amount by the
prevalence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace
districts.84

==== E. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into
Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of this Revolution by the
Application of the Factory Acts to those Industries === =

The cheapening of labour-power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women
and children, by sheer robbery of every normal condition requisite for
working and living, and by the sheer brutality of overwork and
night-work, meets at last with natural obstacles that cannot be
overstepped. So also, when based on these methods, do the cheapening of
commodities and capitalist exploitation in general. So soon as this
point is at last reached -- and it takes many years -- the hour has
struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rapid
conversion of the scattered domestic industries and also of
manufactures into factory industries.

An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by
the production of wearing apparel. This industry, according to the
classification of the Children's Employment Commission, comprises
straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners
and dressmakers, shirt-makers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoemakers,
besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck-ties, collars,
&c. In 1861, the number of females employed in these industries, in
England and Wales, amounted to 586,299, of these 115,242 at the least
were under 20, and 16,650. under 15 years of age. The number of these
workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334. The number of
males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking,
glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years,
89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. Many of the
smaller branches are not included in these figures. But take the
figures as they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone,
according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024,277 persons, about as
many as are absorbed by agriculture and cattle breeding. We begin to
understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up
by the magic of machinery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople,
which that machinery sets free.

The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in manufactories
in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction of that division of
labour, the membra disjecta of which were found ready to hand; partly
by small master-handicraftsmen; these, however, do not, as formerly,
work for individual consumers, but for manufactories and warehouses,
and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country
carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality;
finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, who
form an external department of the manufactories, warehouses, and even
of the workshops of the smaller masters.85

The raw material, &c., is supplied by mechanical industry, the mass of
cheap human material (taillable √† merci et mis√©ricorde) is composed
of the individuals 'liberated' by mechanical industry and improved
agriculture. The manufactures of this class owed their origin chiefly
to the capitalist's need of having at hand an army ready equipped to
meet any increase of demand.86 These manufactures, nevertheless,
allowed the scattered handicrafts and domestic industries to continue
to exist as a broad foundation. The great production of surplus value
in these branches of labour, and the progressive cheapening of their
articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more
than requisite for a miserable vegetation, and to the extension of
working-time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. It was
in fact by the cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which
were converted into commodities, that the markets were constantly being
extended, and continue daily to be extended; more especially was this
the case with England's colonial markets, where, besides, English
tastes and habits prevail. At last the critical point was reached. The
basis of the old method, sheer brutality in the exploitation of the
workpeople, accompanied more or less by a systematic division of
labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still
more rapidly extending competition of the capitalists. The hour struck
for the advent of machinery. The decisively revolutionary machine, the
machine which attacks in an equal degree the whole of the numberless
branches of this sphere of production, dressmaking, tailoring,
shoemaking, sewing, hat-making, and many others, is the sewing-machine.

Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery,
which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches
of trade. Children of too tender an age are sent adrift. The wage of
the machine hands rises compared with that of the house-workers, many
of whom belong to the poorest of the poor. That of the better situated
handicraftsman, with whom the machine competes, sinks. The new machine
hands are exclusively girls and young women. With the help of
mechanical force, they destroy the monopoly that male labour had of the
heavier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old
women and very young children. The overpowering competition crushes the
weakest of the manual labourers. The fearful increase in death from
starvation during the last 10 years in London runs parallel with the
extension of machine sewing.87 The new workwomen turn the machines by
hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing,
according to the weight, size, and special make of the machine, and
expend a great deal of labour-power. Their occupation is unwholesome,
owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as
under the old system. Wherever the sewing-machine locates itself in
narrow and already over-crowded workrooms, it adds to the unwholesome
influences.

'The effect,' says Mr. Lord, 'on entering low-ceiled workrooms in which
30 to 40 machine hands are working is unbearable.... The heat, partly
due to the gas stoves used for warming the irons, is horrible.... Even
when moderate hours of work, i.e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the
evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into a swoon
regularly every day.'88

The revolution in the industrial methods which is the necessary result
of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a
medley of transition forms. These forms vary according to the extent to
which the sewing-machine has become prevalent in one branch, of
industry or the other, to the time during which it has been in
operation, to the previous condition of the workpeople, to the
preponderance of manufacture, of handicrafts or of domestic industry,
to the rent of the workrooms,89 &c. In dressmaking, for instance, where
the labour for the most part was already organised, chiefly by simple
co-operation, the sewing-machine at first formed merely a new factor in
that manufacturing industry. In tailoring, shirtmaking, shoemaking,
&c., all the forms are intermingled. Here the factory system proper.
There middlemen receive the raw material from the capitalist "en chef",
and group around their sewing-machines, in 'chambers' and 'garrets,'
from 10 to 50 or more workwomen. Finally, as is always the case with
machinery when not organised into a system, and when it can also be
used in dwarfish proportions, handicraftsman and domestic workers,
along with their families, or with a little extra labour from without,
make use of their own sewing-machines.90 The system actually prevalent
in England is, that the capitalist concentrates a large number of
machines on his premises, and then distributes the produce of those
machines for further manipulation amongst the domestic workers.91 The
variety of the transition forms, however, does not conceal the tendency
to conversion into the factory system proper. This tendency is nurtured
by the very nature of the sewing-machine, the manifold uses of which
push on the concentration, under one roof, and one management, of
previously separated branches of a trade. It is also favoured by the
circumstance that preparatory needlework, and certain other operations,
are most conveniently done on the premises where the machine is at
work; as well as by the inevitable expropriation of the hand sewers,
and of the domestic workers who work with their own machines. This fate
has already in part overtaken them. The constantly increasing amount of
capital invested in sewing-machines,92 gives the spur to the production
of, and gluts the markets with, machine-made articles, thereby giving
the signal to the domestic workers for the sale of their machines. The
overproduction of sewing-machines themselves, causes their producers,
in bad want of a sale, to let them out for so much a week, thus
crushing by their deadly competition the small owners of machines.93
Constant changes in the construction of the machines, and their
ever-increasing cheapness, depreciate day by day the older makes, and
allow of their being sold in great numbers, at absurd prices, to large
capitalists, who alone can thus employ them at a profit. Finally, the
substitution of the steam-engine for man gives in this, as in all
similar revolutions, the finishing blow. At first, the use of steam
power meets with mere technical difficulties, such as unsteadiness in
the machines, difficulty in controlling their speed, rapid wear and
tear of the lighter machines, &c., all of which are soon overcome by
experience.94 If, on the one hand, the concentration of many machines
in large manufactories leads to the use of steam power, on the other
hand, the competition of steam with human muscles hastens on the
concentration of workpeople and machines in large factories. Thus
England is at present experiencing, not only in the colossal industry
of making wearing apparel, but in most of the other trades mentioned
above, the conversion of manufacture, of handicrafts, and of domestic
work into the factory system, after each of those forms of production,
totally changed and disorganised. under the Influence of modern
industry, has long ago reproduced, and even overdone, all the horrors
of the factory system, without participating in any of the elements of
social progress it contains.95

This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is
artificially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all
industries in which women, young persons and children are employed. The
compulsory regulation of the working day as regards its length, pauses,
beginning and end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of
all children under a certain age, &c., necessitate on the one hand more
machinery96 and the substitution of steam as a motive power in the
place of muscles.97 On the other hand, in order to make up for the loss
of time, an expansion occurs of the means of production used in common,
of the furnaces, buildings, &c., in one word, greater concentration of
the means of production and a correspondingly greater concourse of
workpeople. The chief objection, repeatedly and passionately urged on
behalf of each manufacture threatened with the Factory Act, is in fact
this, that in order to continue the business on the old scale a greater
outlay of capital will be necessary. But as regards labour in the
so-called domestic industries and the intermediate forms between them
and Manufacture, so soon as limits are put to the working day and to
the employment of children, those industries go to the wall. Unlimited
exploitation of cheap labour-power is the sole foundation of their
power to compete.

One of the essential conditions for the existence of the factory
system, especially when the length of the working day is fixed, is
certainty in the result, i.e., the production in a given time of a
given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. The
statutory pauses in the working day, moreover, imply the assumption
that periodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the
article undergoing the process of production. This certainty in the
result, and this possibility of interrupting the work are, of course,
easier to be attained in the purely mechanical industries than in those
in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance,
in the earthenware trade, in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and in most of
the metal industries. Wherever there is a workingday without
restriction as to length, wherever there is night-work and unrestricted
waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the
nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked upon as an
everlasting barrier erected by Nature. No poison kills vermin with more
certainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers. No
one made a greater outcry over 'impossibilities' than our friends the
earthenware manufacturers. In 1864, however, they were brought under
the Act, and within sixteen months every 'impossibility' had vanished.

'The improved method,' called forth by the Act, 'of making slip by
pressure instead of by evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for
drying the ware in its green state, &c., are each events of great
importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding
century could not rival.... It has even considerably reduced the
temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of
fuel, and with a readier effect on the ware.'98

In spite of every prophecy, the cost-price of earthenware did not rise,
but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the export
for the twelve months, ending December, 1865, exceeded in value by
Pounds 138,628 the average of the preceding three years. In the
manufacture of matches it was thought to be an indispensable
requirement, that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on
dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, the poisonous vapour from
which rose into their faces. The Factory Act (1864) made the saving of
time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, the
vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers.99 So, at
the present time, in those branches of the lace manufacture not yet
subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal-times cannot
be regular owing to the different periods required by the various kinds
of lace for drying, which periods vary from three minutes up to an hour
and more. To this the Children's Employment Commissioners answer:

'The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the
paper-stainers, dealt with in our first report. Some of the principal
manufacturers in the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of
the materials used, and their various processes, they would be unable,
without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given moment. But
it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous
arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; and
accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension
Act, passed during this Session of Parliament, an interval of eighteen
months is given to them from the passing of the Act before they are
required to conform to the meal hours, specified by the Factory
Acts.'00

Hardly had the Act been passed when our friends the manufacturers found
out:

'The inconveniences we expected to arise from the introduction of the
Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have
not arisen. We do not find the production at all interfered with; in
short, we produce more in the same time.'01

It is evident that the English legislature, which certainly no one will
venture to reproach with being overdosed with genius, has been led by
experience to the conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient
to enact away all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of
the process, to the restriction and regulation of the working day.
Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given industry, a
period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed within which it is
incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to
the working of the Act. Mirabeau's 'Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce
b√™te de mot!' is particularly applicable to modern technology. But
though the Factory Acts thus artificially ripen the material elements
necessary for the conversion of the manufacturing system into the
factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the necessity they
impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the
small masters, and the concentration of capital.02

Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by
technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople themselves
obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. This is especially the
case where piece-wage predominates, and where loss of time in one part
of the day or week can be made good by subsequent over-time, or by
night-work, a process which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his
wife and children.03 Although this absence of regularity in the
expenditure of labour-power is a natural and rude reaction against the
tedium of monotonous drudgery, it originates, also, to a much greater
degree from anarchy in production, anarchy that in its turn
pre-supposes unbridled exploitation of labour-power by the capitalist.
Besides the general periodic changes of the industrial cycle, and the
special fluctuations in the markets to which each industry is subject,
we may also reckon what is called 'the season,' dependent either on the
periodicity of favourable seasons of the year for navigation; or on
fashion, and the sudden placing of large orders that have to be
executed in the shortest possible time. The habit of giving such orders
becomes more frequent with the extension of railways and telegraphs.

'The extension of the railway system throughout the country has tended
very much to encourage giving short notice. Purchasers now come up from
Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh once every fortnight or so to the
wholesale city warehouses which we supply, and give small orders
requiring immediate execution, instead of buying from stock as they
used to do. Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times,
so as to meet demand of the next season, but now no one can say
beforehand what will be the demand then.'04

In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the
Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails periodically during
what is called the season, in consequence of sudden orders. In the
outside department of the factory, of the manufactory, and of the
warehouse, the so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at the
best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their
orders on the caprice of the capitalist, who, in this industry, is not
hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machinery,
and risks nothing by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker
himself. Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an
industrial reserve force that shall be ready at a moment's notice;
during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman
toil, during the other part, he lets it starve for want of work.

'The employers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the
homework, when any extra work is wanted at a push, so that the work
goes on till 11, and 12 p.m. or 2 a.m., or as the usual phrase is, 'all
hours,' and that in localities where 'the stench is enough to knock you
down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but shudder to go
further.'05 'They are curious men,' said one of the witnesses, a
shoemaker, speaking of the masters, 'they think it does a boy no harm
to work too hard for half the year, if he is nearly idle for the other
half.'06

In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those 'usages which
have grown with the growth of trade' were and still are proclaimed by
interested capitalists as obstacles due to the nature of the work. This
was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first
threatened with the Factory Acts. Although their industry more than any
other depends on navigation, yet experience has given them the lie.
Since then, every pretended obstruction to business has been treated by
the Factory inspectors as a mere sham.07 The thoroughly conscientious
investigations of the Children's Employment Commission prove that the
effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some industries, was
to spread the mass of labour previously employed more evenly over the
whole year08 that this regulation was the first rational bridle on the
murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion,09 caprices that consort so
badly with the system of modern industry; that the development of ocean
navigation and of the means of communication generally, has swept away
the technical basis on which season-work was really supported, 10 and
that all other so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before
larger buildings, additional machinery, increase in the number of
workpeople employed,11 and the alterations caused by all these in the
mode of conducting the wholesale trade.12 But for all that, capital
never becomes reconciled to such changes -- and this is admitted over
and over again by its own representatives -- except 'under the pressure
of a General Act of Parliament'13 for the compulsory regulation of the
hours of labour.

=== Section 9: The Factory Acts. Sanitary and Educational Clauses of
the same. Their General Extension in England == =

Factory legislation, that first conscious and methodical reaction of
society against the spontaneously developed form of the process of
production, is, as we have seen, just as much the necessary product of
modern industry as cotton yarn, self-actors, and the electric
telegraph. Before passing to the consideration of the extension of that
legislation in England, we shall shortly notice certain clauses
contained in the Factory Acts, and not relating to the hours of work.

Apart from their wording, which makes it easy for the capitalist to
evade them, the sanitary clauses are extremely meagre, and, in fact,
limited to provisions for whitewashing the walls, for insuring
cleanliness in some other matters, for ventilation, and for protection
against dangerous machinery. In the third book we shall return again to
the fanatical opposition of the masters to those clauses which imposed
upon them a slight expenditure on appliances for protecting the limbs
of their workpeople, an opposition that throws a fresh and glaring
light on the Free-trade dogma, according to which, in a society with
conflicting interests, each individual necessarily furthers the common
weal by seeking nothing but his own personal advantage! One example is
enough. The reader knows that during the last 20 years, the flax
industry has very much extended, and that, with that extension, the
number of scutching mills in Ireland has increased. In 1864 there were
in that country 1,800 of these mills. Regularly in autumn and winter
women and 'young persons,' the wives, sons, and daughters of the
neighbouring small farmers, a class of people totally unaccustomed to
machinery, are taken from field labour to feed the rollers of the
scutching mills with flax. The accidents, both as regards number and
kind, are wholly unexampled in the history of machinery. In one
scutching mill, at Kildinan, near Cork, there occurred between 1852 and
1856, six fatal accidents and sixty mutilations; every one of which
might have been prevented by the simplest appliances, at the cost of a
few shillings. Dr. W. White, the certifying surgeon for factories at
Downpatrick, states in his official report, dated the 15th December,
1865:

'The serious accidents at the scutching mills are of the most fearful
nature. In many cases a quarter of the body is torn from the trunk, and
either involves death, or a future of wretched incapacity and
suffering. The increase of mills in the country will, of course, extend
these dreadful results, and it will be a great boon if they are brought
under the legislature. I am convinced that by proper supervision of
scutching mills a vast sacrifice of life and limb would be averted.'14

What could possibly show better the character of the capitalist mode of
production, than the necessity that exists for forcing upon it, by Acts
of Parliament, the simplest appliances for maintaining cleanliness and
health? In the potteries the Factory Act of 1864 'has whitewashed and
cleansed upwards of 200 workshops, after a period of abstinence from
any such cleaning, in many cases of 20 years, and in some, entirely,'
(this is the 'abstinence' of the capitalist!) 'in which were employed
27,800 artisans, hitherto breathing through protracted days and often
nights of labour, a mephitic atmosphere, and which rendered an
otherwise comparatively innocuous occupation, pregnant with disease and
death. The Act has improved the ventilation very much.'15


At the same time, this portion of the Act strikingly shows that the
capitalist mode of production, owing to its very nature, excludes all
rational improvement beyond a certain point. It has been stated over
and over again that the English doctors are unanimous in declaring that
where the work is continuous, 500 cubic feet is the very least space
that should be allowed for each person. Now, if the Factory Acts, owing
to their compulsory provisions, indirectly hasten on the conversion of
small workshops into factories, thus indirectly attacking the
proprietary rights of the smaller capitalists, and assuring a monopoly
to the great ones, so, if it were made obligatory to provide the proper
space for each workman in every workshop, thousands of small employers
would, at one full swoop, be expropriated directly! The very root of
the capitalist mode of production, i.e., the self-expansion of all
capital, large or small, by means of the 'free' purchase and
consumption of labour-power, would be attacked. Factory legislation is
therefore brought to a deadlock before these 500 cubic feet of
breathing space. The sanitary officers, the industrial inquiry
commissioners, the factory inspectors, all harp, over and over again,
upon the necessity for those 500 cubic feet, and upon the impossibility
of wringing them out of capital. They thus, in fact, declare that
consumption and other lung diseases among the workpeople are necessary
conditions to the existence of capital.16

Paltry as the education clauses of the Act appear on the whole, yet
they proclaim elementary education to be an indispensable condition to
the employment of children.17 The success of those clauses proved for
the first time the possibility of combining education and gymnastics18
with manual labour, and, consequently, of combining manual labour with
education and gymnastics. The factory inspectors soon found out by
questioning the schoolmasters, that the factory children, although
receiving only one half the education of the regular day scholars, yet
learnt quite as much and often more.

'This can be accounted for by the simple fact that, with only being at
school for one half of the day, they are always fresh, and nearly
always ready and willing to receive instruction. The system on which
they work, half manual labour, and half school, renders each employment
a rest and a relief to the other; consequently, both are far more
congenial to the child, than would be the case were he kept constantly
at one. It is quite clear that a boy who has been at school all the
morning, cannot (in hot weather particularly) cope with one who comes
fresh and bright from his work.'19

Further information on this point will be found in Senior's speech at
the Social Science Congress at Edinburgh in 1863. He there shows,
amongst other things, how the monotonous and uselessly long school
hours of the children of the upper and middle classes, uselessly add to
the labour of the teacher, 'while he not only fruitlessly but
absolutely injuriously, wastes the time, health, and energy of the
children.'20 From the Factory system budded, as Robert Owen has shown
us in detail, the germ of the education of the future, an education
that will, in the case of every child over a given age, combine
productive labour with instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of
the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only
method of producing fully developed human beings.

Modern industry, as we have seen, sweeps away by technical means the
manufacturing division of labour, under which each man is bound hand
and foot for life to a single detail-operation. At the same time, the
capitalistic form of that industry reproduces this same division of
labour in a still more monstrous shape; in the factory proper, by
converting the workman into a living appendage of the machine; and
everywhere outside the Factory, partly by the sporadic use of machinery
and machine workers,21 partly by re-establishing the division of labour
on a fresh basis by the general introduction of the labour of women and
children, and of cheap unskilled labour.

The antagonism between the manufacturing division of labour and the
methods of modern industry makes itself forcibly felt. It manifests
itself, amongst other ways, in the frightful fact that a great part of
the children employed in modern factories and manufactures, are from
their earliest years riveted to the most simple manipulations, and
exploited for years, without being taught a single sort of work that
would afterwards make them of use, even in the same manufactory or
factory. In the English letter-press printing trade, for example, there
existed formerly a system, corresponding to that in the old
manufactures and handicrafts, of advancing the apprentices from easy to
more and more difficult work. They went through a course of teaching
till they were finished printers. To be able to read and write was for
every one of them a requirement of their trade. All this was changed by
the printing machine. It employs two sorts of labourers, one grown up,
renters, the other, boys mostly from 11 to 17 years of age whose sole
business is either to spread the sheets of paper under the machine, or
to take from it the printed sheets. They perform this weary task, in
London especially, for 14, 15, and 16 hours at a stretch, during
several days in the week, and frequently for 36 hours, with only 2
hours' rest for meals and sleep.22 A great part of them cannot read,
and they are, as a rule, utter savages and very extraordinary
creatures.

'To qualify them for the work which they have to do, they require no
intellectual training; there is little room in it for skill, and less
for judgment; their wages, though rather high for boys, do not increase
proportionately as they grow up, and the majority of them cannot look
for advancement to the better paid and more responsible post of machine
minder, because while each machine has but one minder, it has at least
two, and often four boys attached to it.'23

As soon as they get too old for such child's work, that is about 17 at
the latest, they are discharged from the printing establishments. They
become recruits of crime. Several attempts to procure them employment
elsewhere, were rendered of no avail by their ignorance and brutality,
and by their mental and bodily degradation.

As with the division of labour in the interior of the manufacturing
workshops, so it is with the division of labour in the interior of
society. So long as handicraft and manufacture form the general
groundwork of social production, the subjection of the producer to one
branch exclusively, the breaking up of the multifariousness of his
employment24 is a necessary step in the development. On that groundwork
each separate branch of production acquires empirically the form that
is technically suited to it, slowly perfects it, and, so soon as a
given degree of maturity has been reached, rapidly crystallises that
form. The only thing, that here and there causes a change, besides new
raw material supplied by commerce, is the gradual alteration of the
instruments of labour. But their form, too, once definitely settled by
experience, petrifies, as is proved by their being in many cases handed
down in the same form by one generation to another during thousands of
years. A characteristic feature is, that, even down into the eighteenth
century, the different trades were called 'mysteries' (myst√®res);25
into their secrets none but those duly initiated could penetrate.
modern industry rent the veil that concealed from men their own social
process of production, and that turned the various, spontaneously
divided branches of production into so many riddles, not only to
outsiders, but even to the initiated. The principle which it pursued,
of resolving each process into its constituent movements, without any
regard to their possible execution by the hand of man, created the new
modern science of technology. The varied, apparently unconnected, and
petrified forms of the industrial processes now resolved themselves
into so many conscious and systematic applications of natural science
to the attainment of given useful effects. Technology also discovered
the few main fundamental forms of motion, which, despite the diversity
of the instruments used, are necessarily taken by every productive
action of the human body; just as the science of mechanics sees in the
most complicated machinery nothing but the continual repetition of the
simple mechanical powers.

Modern industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a
process as final. The technical basis of that industry is therefore
revolutionary, while all earlier modes of production were essentially
conservative.26 By means of machinery, chemical processes and other
methods, it is continually causing changes not only in the technical
basis of production, but also in the functions of the labourer, and in
the social combinations of the labour-process. At the same time, it
thereby also revolutionises the division of labour within the society,
and incessantly launches masses of capital and of workpeople from one
branch of production to another. But if modern industry, by its very
nature, therefore necessitates variation of labour, fluency of
function, universal mobility of the labourer, on the other hand, in its
capitalistic form, it reproduces the old division of labour with its
ossified particularisations. We have seen how this absolute
contradiction between the technical necessities of modern industry, and
the social character inherent in its capitalistic form, dispels all
fixity and security in the situation of the labourer; how it constantly
threatens, by taking away the instruments of labour, to snatch from his
hands his means of subsistence,27 and, by suppressing his
detail-function, to make him superfluous, We have seen, too, how this
antagonism vents its rage in the creation of that monstrosity, an
industrial reserve army, kept in misery in order to be always at the
disposal of capital; in the incessant human sacrifices from among the
working-class, in the most reckless squandering of labour-power and in
the devastation caused by a social anarchy which turns every economic
progress into a social calamity. This is the negative side. But if, on
the one hand, variation of work at present imposes itself after the
manner of an overpowering natural law, and with the blindly destructive
action of a natural law that meets with resistance28 at all points,
modern industry, on the other hand, through its catastrophes imposes
the necessity of recognising, as a fundamental law of production,
variation of work, consequently fitness of the labourer for varied
work, consequently the greatest possible development of his varied
aptitudes. It becomes a question of life and death for society to adapt
the mode of production to the normal functioning of this law. modern
industry, indeed, compels society, under penalty of death, to replace
the detail-worker of to-day, grappled by life-long repetition of one
and the same trivial operation, and thus reduced to the mere fragment
of a man, by the fully developed individual, fit for a variety of
labours, ready to face any change of production, and to whom the
different social functions he performs, are but so many modes of giving
free scope to his own natural and acquired powers.

One step already spontaneously taken towards effecting this revolution
is the establishment of technical and agricultural schools, and of
'√©coles d'enseignement professionnel,' in which the children of the
working-men receive some little instruction in technology and in the
practical handling of the various implements of labour. Though the
Factory Act, that first and meagre concession wrung from capital, is
limited to combining elementary education with work in the factory,
there can be no doubt that when the working-class comes into power, as
inevitably it must, technical instruction, both theoretical and
practical, will take its proper place in the working-class schools.
There is also no doubt that such revolutionary ferments, the final
result of which is the abolition of the old division of labour, are
diametrically opposed to the capitalistic form of production, and to
the economic status of the labourer corresponding to that form. But the
historical development of the antagonisms, immanent in a given form of
production, is the only way in which that form of production can be
dissolved and a new form established. 'Ne sutor ultra crepidam' -- this
nec plus ultra of handicraft wisdom became sheer nonsense, from the
moment the watchmaker Watt invented the steam-engine, the barber
Arkwright, the throstle, and the working-jeweller, Fulton, the
steamship.29

So long as Factory legislation is confined to regulating the labour in
factories, manufactories, &c., it is regarded as a mere interference
with the exploiting rights of capital. But when it comes to regulating
the so-called 'home-labour,'30 it is immediately viewed as a direct
attack on the patria potestas, on parental authority. The
tender-hearted English Parliament long affected to shrink from taking
this step. The force of facts, however, compelled it at last to
acknowledge that modern industry, in overturning the economic
foundation on which was based the traditional family, and the family
labour corresponding to it, had also unloosened all traditional family
ties. The rights of the children had to be proclaimed. The final report
of the Ch. Empl. Comm. of 1866, states:

'It is unhappily, to a painful degree, apparent throughout the whole of
the evidence, that against no persons do the children of both sexes so
much require protection as against their parents.' The system of
unlimited exploitation of children's labour in general and the
so-called home-labour in particular is "maintained only because the
parents are able, without check or control, to exercise this arbitrary
and mischievous power over their young and tender offspring.... Parents
must not possess the absolute power of making their children mere
'machines to earn so much weekly wage....' The children and young
persons, therefore, in all such cases may justifiably claim from the
legislature, as a natural right, that an exemption should be secured to
them, from what destroys prematurely their physical strength, and
lowers them in the scale of intellectual and moral beings.'31

It was not, however, the misuse of parental authority that created the
capitalistic exploitation, whether direct or indirect, of children's
labour; but, on the contrary, it was the capitalistic mode of
exploitation which, by sweeping away the economic basis of parental
authority, made its exercise degenerate into a mischievous misuse of
power. However terrible and disgusting the dissolution, under the
capitalist system, of the old family ties may appear, nevertheless,
modern industry, by assigning as it does an important part in the
process of production, outside the domestic sphere, to women, to young
persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new economic
foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between
the sexes. It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the
Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it
would be to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient
Greek, or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a
series in historical development. Moreover, it is obvious that the fact
of the collective working group being composed of individuals of both
sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become
a source of humane development; although in its spontaneously
developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where the labourer exists for the
process of production, and not the process of production for the
labourer, that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and
slavery.32

The necessity for a generalisation of the Factory Acts, for
transforming them from an exceptional law relating to mechanical
spinning and weaving -- those first creations of machinery -- into a
law affecting social production as a whole, arose, as we have seen,
from the mode in which modern industry was historically developed. In
the rear of that industry, the traditional form of manufacture, of
handicraft, and of domestic industry, is entirely revolutionised;
manufactures are constantly passing into the factory system, and
handicrafts into manufactures; and lastly, the spheres of handicraft
and of the domestic industries become, in a, comparatively speaking,
wonderfully short time, dens of misery in which capitalistic
exploitation obtains free play for the wildest excesses. There are two
circumstances that finally turn the scale: first, the constantly
recurring experience that capital, so soon as it finds itself subject
to legal control at one point, compensates itself all the more
recklessly at other points;33 secondly, the cry of the capitalists for
equality in the conditions of competition, i.e., for equal restrain on
all exploitation of labour.34 On this point let us listen to two
heart-broken cries. Messrs. Cooksley of Bristol, nail and chain, &c.,
manufacturers, spontaneously introduced the regulations of the Factory
Act into their business.

'As the old irregular system prevails in neighbouring works, the
Messrs. Cooksley are subject to the disadvantage of having their boys
enticed to continue their labour elsewhere after 6 p.m. 'This,' they
naturally say, 'is an unjustice and loss to us, as it exhausts a
portion of the boy's strength, of which we ought to have the full
benefit'.'35

Mr. J. Simpson (paper box and bagmaker, London) states before the
commissioners of the Ch. Empl. Comm.:

'He would sign any petition for it' (legislative interference)... 'As
it was, he always felt restless at night, when he had closed his place,
lest others should be working later than him and getting away his
orders.'36

Summarising, the Ch. Empl. Comm. says:

'It would be unjust to the larger employers that their factories should
be placed under regulation, while the hours of labour in the smaller
places in their own branch of business were under no legislative
restriction. And to the injustice arising from the unfair conditions of
competition, in regard to hours, that would be created if the smaller
places of work were exempt, would be added the disadvantage to the
larger manufacturers, of finding their supply of juvenile and female
labour drawn off to the places of work exempt from legislation.
Further, a stimulus would be given to the multiplication of the smaller
places of work, which are almost invariably the least favourable to the
health, comfort, education, and general improvement of the people.' 37


In its final report the Commission proposes to subject to the Factory
Act more than 1,400,000 children, young persons, and women, of which
number about one half are exploited in small industries and by the
so-called home-work.38 It says,

'But if it should seem fit to Parliament to place the whole of that
large number of children, young persons and females under the
protective legislation above adverted to ... it cannot be doubted that
such legislation would have a most beneficent effect, not only upon the
young and the feeble, who are its more immediate objects, but upon the
still larger body of adult workers, who would in all these employments,
both directly and indirectly, come immediately under its influence. It
would enforce upon them regular and moderate hours; it would lead to
their places of work being kept in a healthy and cleanly state; it
would therefore husband and improve that store of physical strength on
which their own well-being and that of the country so much depends; it
would save the rising generation from that overexertion at an early age
which undermines their constitutions and leads to premature decay;
finally, it would ensure them -- at least up to the age of 13 -- the
opportunity of receiving the elements of education, and would put an
end to that utter ignorance ... so faithfully exhibited in the Reports
of our Assistant Commissioners, and which cannot be regarded without
the deepest pain, and a profound sense of national degradation.'39

The Tory Cabinet40 announced in the Speech from the Throne, on February
5, 1867, that it had framed the proposals of the Industrial Commission
of Inquiry41 into Bills. To get that far, another twenty years of
"experimentum in corpore vili" had been required. Already in 1840 a
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry on the labour of children had been
appointed. Its Report, in 1842, unfolded, in the words of Nassau W.
Senior,

'the most frightful picture of avarice, selfishness and cruelty on the
part of masters and of parents, and of juvenile and infantile misery,
degradation and destruction ever presented.... It may be supposed that
it describes the horrors of a past age. But there is unhappily evidence
that those horrors continue as intense as they were. A pamphlet
published by Hardwicke about 2 years ago states that the abuses
complained of in 1842, are in full bloom at the present day. It is a
strange proof of the general neglect of the morals and health of the
children of the working-class, that this report lay unnoticed for 20
years, during which the children, 'bred up without the remotest sign of
comprehension as to what is meant by the term morals, who had neither
knowledge, nor religion, nor natural affection,' were allowed to become
the parents of the present generation.'42

The social conditions having undergone a change, Parliament could not
venture to shelve the demands of the Commission of 1862, as it had done
those of the Commission of 1840. Hence in 1864, when the Commission had
not yet published more than a part of its reports, the earthenware
industries (including the potteries), makers of paperhangings, matches,
cartridges, and caps, and fustian cutters were made subject to the Acts
in force in the textile industries. In the Speech from the Throne, on
5th February, 1867, the Tory Cabinet of the day announced the
introduction of Bills, founded on the final recommendations of the
Commission, which had completed its labours in 1866.

On the 15th August, 1867, the Factory Acts Extension Act, and on the
21st August, the Workshops' Regulation Act received the Royal Assent;
the former Act having reference to large industries, the latter to
small.

The former applies to blast-furnaces, iron' and copper mills,
foundries, machine shops, metal manufactories, gutta-percha works,
paper mills, glass-works, tobacco manufactories, letter-press printing
(including newspapers), book-binding, in short to all industrial
establishments of the above kind, in which 50 individuals or more are
occupied simultaneously, and for not less than 100 days during the
year.

To give an idea of the extent of the sphere embraced by the Workshops'
Regulation Act in its application, we cite from its interpretation
clause, the following passages:

"Handicraft" shall mean any manual labour exercised by way of trade,
or for purposes of gain in, or incidental to, the making any article or
part of an article, or in, or incidental to, the altering, repairing,
ornamenting, finishing, or otherwise adapting for sale any article.'

"Workshop" shall mean any room or place whatever in the open air or
undercover, in which any handicraft is carried on by any child, young
person, or woman, and to which and over which the person by whom such
child, young person, or woman is employed, has the right of access and
control.'

"Employed" shall mean occupied in any handicraft, whether for wages or
not, under a master or under a parent as herein defined.'

"Parent" shall mean parent, guardian, or person, having the custody
of, or control over, any... child or young person.'

Clause 7, which imposes a penalty for employment of children, young
persons, and women, contrary to the provisions of the Act, subjects to
fines, not only the occupier of the workshop, whether parent or not,
but even

'the parent of, or the person deriving any direct benefit from the
labour of, or having the control over, the child, young person or
woman.'

The Factory Acts Extension Act, which affects the large establishments,
derogates from the Factory Act by a crowd of vicious exceptions and
cowardly compromises with the masters.

The Workshops' Regulation Act, wretched in all its details, remained a
dead letter in the hands of the municipal and local authorities who
were charged with its execution. When, in 1871, Parliament withdrew
from them this power, in order to confer it on the Factory Inspectors,
to whose province it thus added by a single stroke more than one
hundred thousand workshops, and three hundred brickworks, care was
taken at the same time not to add more than eight assistants to their
already undermanned staff.43

What strikes us, then, in the English legislation of 1867, is, on the
one hand, the necessity imposed on the parliament of the ruling
classes, of adopting in principle measures so extraordinary, and on so
great a scale, against the excesses of capitalistic exploitation; and
on the other hand, the hesitation, the repugnance, and the bad faith,
with which it lent itself to the task of carrying those measures into
practice.

The Inquiry Commission of 1862 also proposed a new regulation of the
mining industry, an industry distinguished from others by the
exceptional characteristic that the interests of landlord and
capitalist there join hands. The antagonism of these two interests had
been favourable to Factory legislation, while on the other hand the
absence of that antagonism is sufficient to explain the delays and
chicanery of the legislation on mines.

The Inquiry Commission of 1840 had made revelations so terrible, so
shocking, and creating such a scandal all over Europe, that to salve
its conscience Parliament passed the Mining Act of 1842, in which it
limited itself to forbidding the employment underground in mines of
children under 10 years of age and females.

Then another Act, The Mines' Inspecting Act of 1860, provides that
mines shall be inspected by public officers nominated specially for
that purpose, and that boys between the ages of 10 and 12 years shall
not be employed, unless they have a school certificate, or go to school
for a certain number of hours. This Act was a complete dead letter
owing to the ridiculously small number of inspectors, the meagreness of
their powers, and other causes that will become apparent as we proceed.

One of the most recent Blue books on mines is the 'Report from the
Select Committee on Mines, together with &c. Evidence, 23rd July,
1866.' This Report is the work of a Parliamentary Committee selected
from members of the House of Commons, and authorised to summon and
examine witnesses. It is a thick folio volume in which the Report
itself occupies only five lines to this effect; that the committee has
nothing to say, and that more witnesses must be examined!

The mode of examining the witnesses reminds one of the
cross-examination of witnesses in English courts of justice, where the
advocate tries, by means of impudent, unexpected, equivocal and
involved questions, put without connexion, to intimidate, surprise, and
confound the witness, and to give a forced meaning to the answers
extorted from him. In this inquiry the members of the committee
themselves are the cross-examiners, and among them are to be found both
mine-owners and mine exploiters; the witnesses are mostly working coal
miners. The whole farce is too characteristic of the spirit of capital,
not to call for a few extracts from this Report. For the sake of
conciseness I have classified them. I may also add that every question
and its answer are numbered in the English Blue books.

"1. Employment in mines of boys of 10 years and upwards." -- In the
mines the work, inclusive of going and returning, usually lasts 14 or
15 hours, sometimes even from 3, 4 and 5 o'clock a.m., till 5 and 6
o'clock p.m. (n. 6, 452, 83). The adults work in two shifts, of eight
hours each; but there is no alternation with the boys, on account of
the expense (n. 80, 203, 204). The younger boys are chiefly employed in
opening and shutting the ventilating doors in the various parts of the
mine; the older ones are employed on heavier work. in carrying coal,
&c. (n. 122, 739, 1747). They work these long hours underground until
their 18th or 22nd year, when they are put to miner's work proper (n.
161). Children and young persons are at present worse treated, and
harder worked than at any previous period (n. 1663-1667). The miners
demand almost unanimously an act of Parliament prohibiting the
employment in mines of children under 14. And now Hussey Vivian
(himself an exploiter of mines) asks:

'Would not the opinion of the workman depend upon the poverty of the
workman's family?' Mr. Bruce: 'Do you not think it would be a very hard
case, where a parent had been injured, or where he was sickly, or where
a father was dead, and there was only a mother, to prevent a child
between 12 and 14 earning 1s. 7d. a day for the good of the family? ...
You must lay down a general rule? ... Are you prepared to recommend
legislation which would prevent the employment of children under 12 and
14, whatever the state of their parents might be?' 'Yes.' (ns.
107-110). Vivian: 'Supposing that an enactment were passed preventing
the employment of children under the age of 14, would it not be
probable that ... the parents of children would seek employment for
their children in other directions, for instance, in manufacture?' 'Not
generally I think' (n. 174). Kinnaird: 'Some of the boys are keepers of
doors?' 'Yes.' 'Is there not generally a very great draught every time
you open a door or close it?' 'Yes, generally there is.' 'It sounds a
very easy thing, but it is in fact rather a painful one?' 'He is
imprisoned there just the same as if he was in a cell of a gaol.'
Bourgeois Vivian: 'Whenever a boy is furnished with a lamp cannot he
read?' 'Yes, he can read, if he finds himself in candles.... I suppose
he would be found fault with if he were discovered reading; he is there
to mind his business, he has a duty to perform, and he has to attend to
it in the first place, and I do not think it would be allowed down the
pit.' (ns. 139, 141, 143, 158, 160).

"II. Education." -- The working miners want a law for the compulsory
education of their children, as in factories. They declare the clauses
of the Act of 1860, which require a school certificate to be obtained
before employing boys of 10 and 12 years of age, to be quite illusory.
The examination of the witnesses on this subject is truly droll.

'Is it (the Act) required more against the masters or against the
parents?' 'It is required against both I think.' 'You cannot say
whether it is required against one more than against the other?' 'No; I
can hardly answer that question.' (ns. 115, 116). 'Does there appear to
be any desire on the part of the employers that the boys should have
such hours as to enable them to go to school?' 'No; the hours are never
shortened for that purpose.' (n. 137) Mr. Kinnaird: 'Should you say
that the colliers generally improve their education; have you any
instances of men who have, since they began to work, greatly improved
their education, or do they not rather go back, and lose any advantage
that they may have gained?' 'They generally become worse: they do not
improve; they acquire bad habits; they get on to drinking and gambling
and such like,, and they go completely to wreck.' (n. 21 1.) 'Do they
make any attempt of the kind (for providing instruction) by having
schools at night?' 'There are few collieries where night schools are
held, and perhaps at those collieries a few boys do go to those
schools; but they are so physically exhausted that it is to no purpose
that they go there.' (n. 454.) 'You are then,' concludes the bourgeois,
'against education?' 'Most certainly not; but,' &c. (n. 443.) 'But are
they (the employers) not compelled to demand them (school
certificates)?' 'By law they are; but I am not aware that they are
demanded by the employers.' 'Then it is your opinion, that this
provision of the Act as to requiring certificates, is not generally
carried out in the collieries?' 'It is not carried out.' (ns. 443,
444.) 'Do the men take a great interest in this question (of
education)?' 'The majority of them do.' (n. 717.) 'Are they very
anxious to see the law enforced?' 'The majority are.' (n. 718.) 'Do you
think that in this country any law that you pass ... can really be
effectual unless the population themselves assist in putting it into
operation?' 'Many a man might wish to object to employing a boy, but he
would perhaps become marked by it.' (n. 720.) 'Marked by whom?' 'By his
employers.' (n. 721.) 'Do you think that the employers would find any
fault with a man who obeyed the law... ?' 'I believe they would.' (n.
722.) 'Have you ever heard of any workman objecting to employ a boy
between 10 and 12, who could not write or read?' 'It is not left to
men's option.' (n. 123.) 'Would you call for the interference of
Parliament?' 'I think that if anything effectual is to be done in the
education of the colliers' children, it will have to be made compulsory
by Act of Parliament.' (n. 1634.) 'Would you lay that obligation upon
the colliers only, or all the workpeople of Great Britain?' 'I came to
speak for the colliers.' (n. 1636.) 'Why should you distinguish them
(colliery boys) from other boys?' 'Because I think they are an
exception to the rule.' (n. 1638.) 'In what respect?' 'In a physical
respect.' (n. 1639.) 'Why should education be more valuable to them
than to other classes of lads?' 'I do not know that it is more
valuable; but through the over-exertion in mines there is less chance
for the boys that are employed there to get education, either at Sunday
schools, or at day schools.' (n. 1640.) 'It is impossible to look at a
question of this sort absolutely by itself?' (n. 1644.) 'Is there a
sufficiency of schools?' -- 'No"... (n. 1646). 'If the State were to
require that every child should be sent to school, would there be
schools for the children to go to?' 'No; but I think if the
circumstances were to spring up, the schools would be forthcoming.' (n.
1647.) 'Some of them (the boys) cannot read and write at all, I
suppose?' 'The majority cannot... The majority of the men themselves
cannot.' (ns. 705, 725.)

"III. Employment of women." -- Since 1842 women are no more employed
underground, but are occupied on the surface in loading the coal, &c.,
in drawing the tubs to the canals and railway waggons, in sorting, &c.
Their numbers have considerably increased during the last three or four
years. (n. 1727.) They are mostly the wives, daughters, and widows of
the working miners, and their ages range from 12 to 50 or 60 years.
(ns. 645, 1779.)

'What is the feeling among the working miners as to the employment of
women?' 'I think they generally condemn it.' (n. 648.) 'What objection
do you see to it?' 'I think it is degrading to the sex.' (n. 649.)
'There is a peculiarity of dress?' 'Yes ... it is rather a man's dress,
and I believe in some cases, it drowns all sense of decency.' 'Do the
women smoke?' 'Some do.' 'And I suppose it is very dirty work?' 'Very
dirty.' 'They get black and grimy?' 'As black as those who are down the
mines ... I believe that a woman having children (and there are plenty
on the banks that have) cannot do her duty to her children.' (ns.
650-654, 701.) 'Do you think that those widows could get employment
anywhere else, which would bring them in as much wages as that (from
8s. to 10s. a week)?' 'I cannot speak to that.' (n. 709.) 'You would
still be prepared, would you,' (flint-hearted fellow!) 'to prevent
their obtaining a livelihood by these means?' 'I would.' (n. 710.)
'What is the general feeling in the district ... as to the employment
of women?' 'The feeling is that it is degrading; and we wish as miners
to have more respect to the fair sex than to see them placed on the pit
bank... Some part of the work is very hard; some of these girls have
raised as much as 10 tons of stuff a day.' (ns. 1715,1717.) 'Do you
think that the women employed about the collieries are less moral than
the women employed in the factories?' '. ..the percentage of bad ones
may be a little more ... than with the girls in the factories.' (n.
1237.) 'But you are not quite satisfied with the state of morality in
the factories?' 'No.' (n. 1733.) 'Would you prohibit the employment of
women in factories also?' 'No, I would not.' (n. 1734.) 'Why not?' 'I
think it a more honourable occupation for them in the mills.' (n.
1735.) 'Still it is injurious to their morality, you think?' 'Not so
much as working on the pit bank; but it is more on the social position
I take it; I do not take it on its moral ground alone. The degradation,
in its social bearing on the girls, is deplorable in the extreme. When
these 400 or 500 girls become colliers' wives, the men suffer greatly
from this degradation, and it causes them to leave their homes and
drink.' (n. 1736.) 'You would be obliged to stop the employment of
women in the ironworks as well, would you not, if you stopped it in the
collieries?' 'I cannot speak for any other trade.' (n. 1737.) 'Can you
see any difference in the circumstances of women employed in ironworks,
and the circumstances of women employed above ground in collieries?' 'I
have not ascertained anything as to that.' (n. 1740.) 'Can you see
anything that makes a distinction between one class and the other?' 'I
have not ascertained that, but I know from house to house visitation,
that it is a deplorable state of things in our district....' (n. 1741.)
'Would you interfere in every case with the employment of women where
that employment was degrading?' 'It would become injurious, I think, in
this way: the best feelings of Englishmen have been gained from the
instruction of a mother. ... (n. 1750.) 'That equally applies to
agricultural employments, does it not?' 'Yes, but that is only for two
seasons, and we have work all the four seasons.' (n. 1751.) 'They often
work day and night, wet through to the skin, their constitution
undermined and their health ruined.' 'You have not inquired into that
subject perhaps?' 'I have certainly taken note of it as I have gone
along, and certainly I have seen nothing parallel to the effects of the
employment of women on the pit bank.... It is the work of a man... a
strong man.' (ns. 1753, 1793, 1794.) 'Your feeling upon the whole
subject is that the better class of colliers who desire to raise
themselves and humanise themselves, instead of deriving help from the
women, are pulled down by them?' 'Yes.' (n. 1808.) After some further
crooked questions from these bourgeois, the secret of their 'sympathy'
for widows, poor families, &c., comes out at last. 'The coal proprietor
appoints certain gentlemen to take the oversight of the workings, and
it is their policy, in order to receive approbation, to place things on
the most economical basis they can, and these girls are employed at
from 1s. up to 1s. 6d. a day, where a man at the rate of 2s. 6d. a day
would have to be employed.' (n. 1816.)

"IV. Coroner's inquests. --"

'With regard to coroner's inquests in your district, have the workmen
confidence in the proceedings at those inquests when accidents occur?'
'No; they have not.' (n. 360.) 'Why not?' 'Chiefly because the men who
are generally chosen, are men who know nothing about mines and such
like.' 'Are not workmen summoned at all upon the juries?' 'Never but as
witnesses to my knowledge.' 'Who are the people who are generally
summoned upon these juries?' 'Generally tradesmen in the neighbourhood
... from their circumstances they are sometimes liable to be influenced
by their employers ... the owners of the works. They are generally men
who have no knowledge, and can scarcely understand the witnesses who
are called before them, and the terms which are used and such like.'
'Would you have the jury composed of persons who had been employed in
mining?' 'Yes, partly... they (the workmen) think that the verdict is
not in accordance with the evidence given generally.' (ns. 361, 364,
366, 368, 371, 375.) 'One great object in summoning a jury is to have
an impartial one, is it not?' 'Yes, I should think so.' 'Do you think
that the juries would be impartial if they were composed to a
considerable extent of workmen?' 'I cannot see any motive which the
workmen would have to act partially ... they necessarily have a better
knowledge of the operations in connexion with the mine.' 'You do not
think there would be a tendency on the part of the workmen to return
unfairly severe verdicts?' 'No, I think not.' (ns. 378, 379, 380.)

"V. False weights and measures." -- The workmen demand to be paid
weekly instead of fortnightly, and by weight instead of by cubical
contents of the tubs; they also demand protection against the use of
false weights, &c. (n. 1071.)

'If the tubs were fraudulently increased, a man. could discontinue
working by giving 14 days' notice?' 'But if he goes to another place,
there is the same thing going on there.' (n. 1071.) 'But he can leave
that place where the wrong has been committed?' 'It is general;
wherever he goes, he has to submit to it.' (n. 1072.) 'Could a man
leave by giving 14 days' notice?' 'Yes.' (n. 1073.) And yet they are
not satisfied!

"VI. Inspection of mines." -- Casualties from explosions are not the
only things the workmen suffer from. (n. 234, sqq.)

'Our men complained very much of the bad ventilation of the collieries
... the ventilation is so bad in general that the men can scarcely
breathe; they are quite unfit for employment of any kind after they
have been for a length of time in connexion with their work; indeed,
just at the part of the mine where I am working, men have been obliged
to leave their employment and come home in consequence of that ... some
of them have been out of work for weeks just in consequence of the bad
state of the ventilation where there is not explosive gas ... there is
plenty of air generally in the main courses, yet pains are not taken to
get air into the workings where men are working.' 'Why do you not apply
to the inspector?' 'To tell the truth there are many men who are timid
on that point; there have been cases of men being sacrificed and losing
their employment in consequence of applying to the inspector.' 'Why is
he a marked man for having complained?' 'Yes...... And he finds it
difficult to get employment in another mine?' 'Yes.' 'Do you think the
mines in your neighbourhood are sufficiently inspected to insure a
compliance with the provisions of the Act?' 'No; they are not inspected
at all ... the inspector has been down just once in the pit, and it has
been going seven years.... In the district to which I belong there are
not a sufficient number of inspectors. We have one old man more than 70
years of age to inspect more than 130 collieries.' 'You wish to have a
class of sub-inspectors?' 'Yes.' (ns. 234, 241, 251, 254, 274, 275,
554, 276, 293.) 'But do you think it would be possible for Government
to maintain such an army of inspectors as would be necessary to do all
that you want them to do, without information from the men?' 'No, I
should think it would be next to impossible....' 'It would be desirable
the inspectors should come oftener?' 'Yes, and without being sent for.'
(n. 280, 277.) 'Do you not think that the effect of having these
inspectors examining the collieries so frequently would be to shift the
responsibility (!) of supplying proper ventilation from the owners of
the collieries to the Government officials?' 'No, I do not think that,
I think that they should make it their business to enforce the Acts
which are already in existence.' (n. 285.) 'When you speak of
sub-inspectors, do you mean men at a less salary, and of an inferior
stamp to the present inspectors?' 'I would not have them inferior, if
you could get them otherwise.' (n. 294.) 'Do you merely want more
inspectors, or do you want a lower class of men as an inspector?' 'A
man who would knock about, and see that things are kept right; a man
who would not be afraid of himself.' (n. 295.) 'If you obtained your
wish in getting an inferior class of inspectors appointed, do you think
that there would be no danger from want of skill, &c?' 'I think not, I
think that the Government would see after that, and have proper men in
that position.' (n. 297.)

This kind of examination becomes at last too much even for the chairman
of the committee, and he interrupts with the observation:

'You want a class of men who would look into all the details of the
mine, and would go into all the holes and corners, and go into the real
facts ... they would report to the chief inspector, who would then
bring his scientific knowledge to bear on the facts they have stated?'
(ns. 298, 299.) 'Would it not entail very great expense if all these
old workings were kept ventilated?' 'Yes, expense might be incurred,
but life would be at the same time protected.' (n. 531.)

A working miner objects to the 17th section of the Act of 1860; he
says,

'At the present time, if the inspector of mines finds a part of the
mine unfit to work in, he has to report it to the mine-owner and the
Home Secretary. After doing that, there is given to the owner 20 days
to look over the matter; at the end of 20 days he has the power to
refuse making any alteration in the mine; but, when he refuses, the
mine-owner writes to the Home Secretary, at the same time nominating
five engineers, and from those five engineers named by the mine-owner
himself, the Home Secretary appoints one, I think, as arbitrator, or
appoints arbitrators from them; now we think in that case the
mine-owner virtually appoints his own arbitrator.' (n. 581.)

Bourgeois examiner, himself a mine-owner:

'But ... is this a merely speculative objection?' (n. 586.) 'Then you
have a very poor opinion of the integrity of mining engineers?' 'It is
most certainly unjust and inequitable.' (n. 588.) 'Do not mining
engineers possess a sort of public character, and do not you think that
they are above making such a partial decision as you apprehend?' 'I do
not wish to answer such a question as that with respect to the personal
character of those men. I believe that in many cases they would act
very partially indeed, and that it ought not to be in their hands to do
so, where men's lives are at stake.' (n. 589.)

This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: 'Do you not
think that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an explosion?'
Finally, 'Are not you workmen in Lancashire able to take care of your
own interests without calling in the Government to help you?' 'No.' (n.
1042.)

In the year 1865 there were 3,217 coal mines in Great Britain, and 12
inspectors. A Yorkshire mine-owner himself calculates ("Times", 26th
January, 1867), that putting on one side their office work, which
absorbs all their time, each mine can be visited but once in ten years
by an inspector. No wonder that explosions have increased
progressively, both in number and extent (sometimes with a loss of
200-300 men), during the last ten years. These are the beauties of
'free' capitalist production! "

   The very defective Act, passed in 1872, is the first that regulates
   the hours of labour of the children employed in mines, and makes
   exploiters and owners, to a certain extent, responsible for
   so-called accidents.
   
The Royal Commission appointed in 1867 to inquire into the employment
in agriculture of children, young persons, and women, has published
some very important reports. Several attempts to apply the principles
of the Factory Acts, but in a modified form, to agriculture have been
made, but have so far resulted in complete failure. All that I wish to
draw attention to here is the existence of an irresistible tendency
towards the general application of those principles.

If the general extension of factory legislation to all trades for the
purpose of protecting the working-class both in mind and body has
become inevitable, on the other hand, as we have already pointed out,
that extension hastens on the general conversion of numerous isolated
small industries into a few combined industries carried on upon a large
scale; it therefore accelerates the concentration of capital and the
exclusive predominance of the factory system. It destroys both the
ancient and the transitional forms, behind which the dominion of
capital is still in part concealed, and replaces them by the direct and
open sway of capital; but thereby it also generalises the direct
opposition to this sway. While in each individual workshop it enforces
uniformity, regularity, order, and economy, it increases by the immense
spur which the limitation and regulation of the working day give to
technical improvement, the anarchy and the catastrophes of capitalist
production as a whole, the intensity of labour, and the competition of
machinery with the labourer. By the destruction of petty and domestic
industries it destroys the last resort of the 'redundant population,'
and with it the sole remaining safety-valve of the whole social
mechanism. By maturing the material conditions, and the combination on
a social scale of the processes of production, it matures the
contradictions and antagonisms of the capitalist form of production,
and thereby provides, along with the elements for the formation of a
new society, the forces for exploding the old one.44

=== Section 10: Modern Industry and Agriculture == =

The revolution called forth by modern industry in agriculture, and in
the social relations of agricultural producers, will be investigated
later on. In this place, we shall merely indicate a few results by way
of anticipation. If the use of machinery in agriculture is for the most
part free from the injurious physical effect it has on the factory
operative, its action in superseding the labourers is more intense, and
finds less resistance, as we shall see later in detail. In the counties
of Cambridge and Suffolk, for example, the area of cultivated land has
extended very much within the last 20 years (up to 1868), while in the
same period the rural population has diminished, not only relatively,
but absolutely. In the United States it is as yet only virtually that
agricultural machines replace labourers; in other words, they allow of
the cultivation by the farmer of a larger surface, but do not actually
expel the labourers employed. In 1861 the number of persons occupied in
England and Wales in the manufacture of agricultural machines was
1,034, whilst the number of agricultural labourers employed in the use
of agricultural machines and steam-engines did not exceed 1,205.

In the sphere of agriculture, modern industry has a more revolutionary
effect than elsewhere, for this reason, that it annihilates the
peasant, that bulwark of the old society, and replaces him by the
wage-labourer. Thus the desire for social changes, and the class
antagonisms are brought to the same level in the country as in the
towns. The irrational, old-fashioned methods of agriculture are
replaced by scientific ones. Capitalist production completely tears
asunder the old bond of union which held together agriculture and
manufacture in their infancy. But at the same time it creates the
material conditions for a higher synthesis in the future, viz., the
union of agriculture and industry on the basis of the more perfected
forms they have each acquired during their temporary separation.
Capitalist production, by collecting the population in great centres,
and causing an ever-increasing preponderance of town population, on the
one hand concentrates the historical motive power of society; on the
other hand, it disturbs the circulation of matter between man and the
soil, i.e., prevents the return to the soil of its elements consumed by
man in the form of food and clothing; it therefore violates the
conditions necessary to lasting fertility of the soil. By this action
it destroys at the same time the health of the town labourer and the
intellectual life of the rural labourer.45 But while upsetting the
naturally grown conditions for the maintenance of that circulation of
matter, it imperiously calls for its restoration as a system, as a
regulating law of social production, and under a form appropriate to
the full development of the human race. In agriculture as in
manufacture, the transformation of production under the sway of
capital, means, at the same time, the martyrdom of the producer; the
instrument of labour becomes the means of enslaving, exploiting, and
impoverishing the labourer; the social combination and organisation of
labour-processes is turned into an organised mode of crushing out the
workman's individual vitality, freedom, and independence. The
dispersion of the rural labourers over larger areas breaks their power
of resistance while concentration increases that of the town
operatives. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the
increased productiveness and quantity of the labour set in motion are
bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease
labour-power itself. Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture
is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the labourer, but of
robbing the soil; all progress in increasing the fertility of the soil
for a given time, is a progress towards ruining the lasting sources of
that fertility. The more a country starts its development on the
foundation of modern industry, like the United States, for example, the
more rapid is this process of destruction. 46 Capitalist production,
therefore, develops technology, and the combining together of various
processes into a social whole, only by sapping the original sources of
all wealth-the soil and the labourer.

= Part 5: Production of Absolute and Relative Surplus Value =

== Chapter 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus Value = =

In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter VII.) by
treating it in the abstract, apart from its historical forms, as a
process between man and Nature. We there stated, 'If we examine the
whole labour-process, from the point of view of its result, it is plain
that both the instruments and the subject of labour are means of
production, and that the labour itself is productive labour.' And in
Note 2, same page, we further added: 'This method of determining, from
the standpoint of the labour-process alone, what is productive labour,
is by no means directly applicable to the case of the capitalist
process of production.' We now proceed to the further development of
this subject.

So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the same
labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on become
separated. When an individual appropriates natural objects for his
livelihood, no one controls him but himself. Afterwards he is
controlled by others. A single man cannot operate upon Nature without
calling his own muscles into play under the control of his own brain.
As in the natural body head and hand wait upon each other, so the
labour-process unites the labour of the hand with that of the head.
Later on they part company and even become deadly foes. The product
ceases to be the direct product of the individual, and becomes a social
product, produced in common by a collective labourer, "i.e.", by a
combination of workmen, each of whom takes only a part, greater or
less, in the manipulation of the subject of their labour. As the
co-operative character of the labour-process becomes more and more
marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of productive
labour, and of its agent the productive labourer, become extended. In
order to labour productively, it is no longer necessary for you to do
manual work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective
labourer, and perform one of its subordinate functions. The first
definition given above of productive labour, a definition deduced from
the very nature of the production of material objects, still remains
correct for the collective labourer, considered as a whole. But it no
longer holds good for each member taken individually.

On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes
narrowed. Capitalist production is not merely the production of
commodities, it is essentially the production of surplus value. The
labourer produces, not for himself, but for capital. It no longer
suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce. He must produce
surplus value. That labourer alone is productive, who produces surplus
value for the capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of
capital. If we may take an example from outside the sphere of
production of material objects, a schoolmaster is a productive labourer
when, in addition to belabouring the heads of his scholars, he works
like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. That the latter has laid
out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in a sausage factory,
does not alter the relation. Hence the notion of a productive labourer
implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect, between
labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation of
production, a relation that has sprung up historically and stamps the
labourer as the direct means of creating surplus value. To be a
productive labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a
misfortune. In Book IV. which treats of the history of the theory, it
will be more clearly seen, that the production of surplus value has at
all times been made, by classical political economists, the
distinguishing characteristic of the productive labourer. Hence their
definition of a productive labourer changes with their comprehension of
the nature of surplus value. Thus the Physiocrats insist that only
agricultural labour is productive, since that alone, they say, yields a
surplus value. And they say so because, with them, surplus value has no
existence except in the form of rent.

The prolongation of the working day beyond the point at which the
labourer would have produced just an equivalent for the value of his
labour-power, and the appropriation of that surplus labour by capital,
this is production of absolute surplus value. It forms the general
groundwork of the capitalist system, and the starting-point for the
production of relative surplus value. The latter pre-supposes that the
working day is already divided into two parts, necessary labour, and
surplus labour. In order to prolong the surplus labour, the necessary
labour is shortened by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is
produced in less time. The production of absolute surplus value turns
exclusively upon the length of the working day; the production of
relative surplus value, revolutionises out and out the technical
processes of labour, and the composition of society. It therefore
pre-supposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode of production, a mode
which, along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and
develops itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal
subjection of labour to capital. In the course of this development, the
formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to
capital.

It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms, in which
surplus labour is not extorted by direct compulsion from the producer,
nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital. In such
forms capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the
labour-process. By the side of independent producers who carry on their
handicrafts and agriculture in the traditional old-fashioned way, there
stands the usurer or the merchant, with his usurer's capital or
merchant's capital, feeding on them like a parasite. The predominance,
in a society, of this form of exploitation excludes the capitalist mode
of production; to which mode, however, this form may serve as a
transition, as it did towards the close of the Middle Ages. Finally, as
is shown by modern 'domestic industry,' some intermediate forms are
here and there reproduced in the background of Modern Industry, though
their physiognomy is totally changed.

If, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital
suffices for the production of absolute surplus value, if, "e.g.", it
is sufficient that handicraftsman who previously worked on their own
account, or as apprentices of a master, should become wage labourers
under the direct control of a capitalist; so, on the other hand, we
have seen, how the methods of producing relative surplus value, are, at
the same time, methods of producing absolute surplus value. Nay, more,
the excessive prolongation of the working day turned out to be the
peculiar product of Modern Industry. Generally speaking, the
specifically capitalist mode of production ceases to be a mere means of
producing relative surplus value, so soon as that mode has conquered an
entire branch of production; and still more so, so soon as it has
conquered all the important branches. It then becomes the general,
socially predominant form of production. As a special method of
producing relative surplus value, it remains effective only, first, in
so far as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally
subject to capital, that is, so far as it is propagandist; secondly, in
so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue to
be revolutionised by changes in the methods of production.

From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative
surplus value appears illusory. Relative surplus value is absolute,
since it compels the absolute prolongation of the working day beyond
the labour-time necessary to the existence of the labourer himself.
Absolute surplus value is relative, since it makes necessary such a
development of the productiveness of labour, as will allow of the
necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the working day.
But if we keep in mind the behaviour of surplus value, this appearance
of identity vanishes. Once the capitalist mode of production is
established and become general, the difference between absolute and
relative surplus value makes itself felt, whenever there is a question
of raising the rate of surplus value. Assuming that labour-power is
paid for at its value, we are confronted by this alternative: given the
productiveness of labour and its normal intensity, the rate of surplus
value can be raised only by the actual prolongation of the working day;
on the other hand, given the length of the working day, that rise can
be effected only by a change in the relative magnitudes of the
components of the working day, viz., necessary labour and surplus
labour; a change which, if the wages are not to fall below the value of
labour-power, presupposes a change either in the productiveness or in
the intensity of the labour.

If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means of
subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time left in which to
work gratis for others. Without a certain degree of productiveness in
his labour, he has no such superfluous time at his disposal; without
such superfluous time, no surplus labour, and therefore no capitalists,
no slave-owners, no feudal lords, in one word, no class of large
proprietors.

Thus we may say that surplus value rests on a natural basis; but this
is permissible only in the very general sense, that there is no natural
obstacle absolutely preventing one man from disburdening himself of the
labour requisite for his own existence, and burdening another with it,
any more, for instance, than unconquerable natural obstacle prevent one
man from eating the flesh of another. No mystical ideas must in any way
be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically developed
productiveness of labour. It is only after men have raised themselves
above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour has been to some
extent socialised, that a state of things arises in which the surplus
labour of the one becomes a condition of existence for the other. At
the dawn of civilisation the productiveness acquired by labour is
small, but so too are the wants which develop with and by the means of
satisfying them. Further, at that early period, the portion of society
that lives on the labour of others is infinitely small compared with
the mass of direct producers. Along with the progress in the
productiveness of labour, that small portion of society increases both
absolutely and relatively. Besides, capital with its accompanying
relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a
long process of development. The productiveness of labour that serves
as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift, not of nature, but of
a history embracing thousands of centuries.

Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the form of
social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered by physical
conditions. These are all referable to the constitution of man himself
(race, &c.), and to surrounding nature. The external physical
conditions fall into two great economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in
means of subsistence, "i.e.", a fruitful soil, waters teeming with
fish, &c., and (2), natural wealth in the instruments of labour, such
as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood, metal, coal, &c. At the dawn of
civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher
stage of development, it is the second. Compare, for example, England
with India, or in ancient times, Athens and Corinth with the shores of
the Black Sea.

The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling for
satisfaction, and the greater the natural fertility of the soil and the
favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour-time
necessary for the maintenance and reproduction of the producer. So much
greater therefore can be the excess of his labours for others over his
labour for himself. Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the
ancient Egyptians.

'It is altogether incredible how little trouble and expense the
bringing up of their children causes them. They cook for them the first
simple food at hand; they also give them the lower part of the papyrus
stem to eat, so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and
stalks of marsh plants, some raw, some boiled and roasted. Most of the
children go without shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild. Hence
a child, until he is grown up, costs his parents not more, on the
whole, than twenty drachmas. It is this, chiefly, which explains why
the population of Egypt is so numerous, and, therefore, why so many
great works can be undertaken.'

Nevertheless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the
extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was
freely disposable. Just as the individual labourer can do more surplus
labour in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with
regard to the working population. The smaller the part of it which is
required for the production of the necessary means of subsistence, so
much the greater is the part that can be set to do other work.

Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circumstances
remaining the same, and given the length of the working day, the
quantity of surplus labour will vary with the physical conditions of
labour, especially with the fertility of the soil. But it by no means
follows from this that the most fruitful soil is the most fitted for
the growth of the capitalist mode of production. This mode is based on
the dominion of man over nature. Where nature is too lavish, she 'keeps
him in hand, like a child in leading-strings.' She does not impose upon
him any necessity to develop himself. It is not the tropics with their
luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the
mother-country of capital. It is not the mere fertility of the soil,
but the differentiation of the soil, the variety of its natural
products, the changes of the seasons, which form the physical basis for
the social division of labour, and which, by changes in the natural
surroundings, spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his
capabilities, his means and modes of labour. It is the necessity of
bringing a natural force under the control of society, of economising,
of appropriating or subduing it on a large scale by the work of man's
hand, that first plays the decisive part in the history of industry.
Examples are, the irrigation works in Egypt, Lombardy, Holland, or in
India and Persia where irrigation by means of artificial canals, not
only supplies the soil with the water indispensable to it, but also
carries down to it, in the shape of sediment from the hills, mineral
fertilisers. The secret of the flourishing state of industry in Spain
and Sicily under the dominion of the Arabs lay in their irrigation
works.

Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possibility,
never the reality, of surplus labour, nor, consequently, of surplus
value and a surplus-product. The result of difference in the natural
conditions of labour is this, that the same quantity of labour
satisfies, in different countries, a different mass of requirements,
consequently, that under circumstances in other respects analogous, the
necessary labour-time is different. These conditions affect surplus
labour only as natural limits, "i.e.", by fixing the points at which
labour for others can begin. In proportion as industry advances, these
natural limits recede. In the midst of our West European society, where
the labourer purchases the right to work for his own livelihood only by
paying for it in surplus labour, the idea easily takes root that it is
an inherent quality of human labour to furnish a surplus-product. But
consider, for example, an inhabitant of the eastern islands of the
Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests.

'When the inhabitants have convinced themselves, by boring a hole in
the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down and divided into
several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water and filtered:
it is then quite fit for use as sago. One tree commonly yields 300
lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. There, then, people go into the
forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut
fire-wood.' 0


Suppose now such an eastern bread-cutter requires 12 working hours a
week for the satisfaction of all his wants. Nature's direct gift to him
is plenty of leisure time. Before he can apply this leisure time
productively for himself, a whole series of historical events is
required; before he spends it in surplus labour for strangers,
compulsion is necessary. If capitalist production were introduced, the
honest fellow would perhaps have to work six days a week, in order to
appropriate to himself the product of one working day. The bounty of
Nature does not explain why he would then have to work 6 days a week,
or why he must furnish 5 days of surplus labour. It explains only why
his necessary labour-time would be limited to one day a week. But in no
case would his surplus-product arise from some occult quality inherent
in human labour.

Thus, not only does the historically developed social productiveness of
labour, but also its natural productiveness, appear to be
productiveness of the capital with which that labour is incorporated.

Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus value. He
treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production,
which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of social production.
Whenever he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not
the cause of surplus value, but the cause that determines the magnitude
of that value. On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed the
productiveness of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read:
Surplus value). This at all events is a progress as against the
mercantilists who, on their side, derived the excess of the price over
the cost of production of the product, from the act of exchange, from
the product being sold above its value. Nevertheless, Ricardo's school
simply shirked the problem, they did not solve it. In fact these
bourgeois economists instinctively saw, and rightly so, that it is very
dangerous to stir too deeply the burning question of the origin of
surplus value. But what are we to think of John Stuart Mill, who, half
a century after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority over the
mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched evasions of Ricardo's
earliest vulgarisers?

Mill says:

'The cause of profit is that labour produces more than is required for
its support.'

So far, nothing but the old story; but Mill wishing to add something of
his own, proceeds:

'To vary the form of the theorem; the reason why capital yields a
profit, is because food, clothing, materials and tools, last longer
than the time which was required to produce them.'

He here confounds the duration of labour-time with the duration of its
products. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only a
day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a
machine maker whose products endure for 20 years and more. Of course it
is very true, that if a bird's nest did not last longer than the time
it takes in building, birds would have to do without nests.

This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his own
superiority over the mercantilists.

'We thus see,' he proceeds, 'that profit arises, not from the incident
of exchange, but from the productive power of labour; and the general
profit of the country is always what the productive power of labour
makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not. If there were no
division of employments, there would be no buying or selling, but there
would still be profit.'

For Mill then, exchange, buying and selling, those general conditions
of capitalist production, are but an incident, and there would always
be profits even without the purchase and sale of labour-power!

'If,' he continues, 'the labourers of the country collectively produce
twenty per cent more than their wages, profits will be twenty per cent,
whatever prices may or may not be.' This is, on the one hand, a rare
bit of tautology; for if labourers produce a surplus value of 20% for
the capitalist, his profit will be to the total wages of the labourers
as 20:100. On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that
'profits will be 20%.' They will always be less, because they are
calculated upon the "sum total" of the capital advanced. If, for
example, the capitalist have advanced Pounds 500, of which Pounds 4OO
is laid out in means of production and Pounds 100 in wages, and if the
rate of surplus value be 20%, the rate of profit will be 20:500,
"i.e.", 4% and not 20%.

Then follows a splendid example of Mill's method of handling the
different historical forms of social production.

'I assume, throughout, the state of things which, where the labourers
and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions,
universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole expenses,
including the entire remuneration of the labourer.'

Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as
yet exists only exceptionally on our earth.1 But let us finish -- Mill
is willing to concede,

'that he should do so is not a matter of inherent necessity.' On the
contrary: 'the labourer might wait, until the production is complete,
for all that part of his wages which exceeds mere necessaries: and even
for the whole, if he has funds in hand sufficient for his temporary
support. But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really
a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds
necessary for carrying it on.'

Mill might have gone further and have added, that the labourer who
advances to himself not only the necessaries of life but also the means
of production, is in reality nothing but his own wage-labourer. He
might also have said that the American peasant proprietor is but a serf
who does enforced labour for himself instead of for his lord.

After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production had no
existence, still it would always exist, Mill is consistent enough to
show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even when it does
exist.

'And even in the former case' (when the workman is a wage labourer to
whom the capitalist advances all the necessaries of life, he the
labourer), 'may be looked upon in the same light,' (i.e., as a
capitalist), 'since, contributing his labour at less than the
market-price, (!) he may be regarded as lending the difference (?) to
his employer and receiving it back with interest, &c.' 2


In reality, the labourer advances his labour gratuitously to the
capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market price
at the end of the week, &c., and it is this which, according to Mill,
transforms him into a capitalist. On the level plain, simple mounds
look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of the present bourgeoisie
is to be measured by the altitude of its great intellects.

== Chapter 17: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in
Surplus Value = =

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of the necessaries
of life habitually required by the average labourer. The quantity of
these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and
can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude. What changes, is the
value of this quantity. There are, besides, two other factors that
enter into the determination of the value of labour-power. One, the
expenses of developing that power, which expenses vary with the mode of
production; the other, its natural diversity, the difference between
the labour-power of men and women, of children and adults. The
employment of these different sorts of labour-power, an employment
which is, in its turn, made necessary by the mode of production, makes
a great difference in the cost of maintaining the family of the
labourer, and in the value of the labour-power of the adult male. Both
these factors, however, are excluded in the following investigation.

I assume (1) that commodities are sold at their value; (2) that the
price of labour-power rises occasionally above its value, but never
sinks below it.

On this assumption we have seen that the relative magnitudes of surplus
value and of price of labour-power are determined by three
circumstances; (1) the length of the working day, or the extensive
magnitude of labour; (2) the normal intensity of labour, its intensive
magnitude, whereby a given quantity of labour is expended in a given
time; (3) the productiveness of labour, whereby the same quantum of
labour yields, in a given time, a greater or less quantum of product,
dependent on the degree of development in the conditions of production.
Very different combinations are clearly possible, according as one of
the three factors is constant and two variable, or two constant and one
variable, or lastly, all three simultaneously variable. And the number
of these combinations is augmented by the fact that, when these factors
simultaneously vary, the amount and direction of their respective
variations may differ. In what follows the chief combinations alone are
considered.

=== Section 1: Length of the Working day and Intensity of Labour
Constant. Productiveness of Labour Variable == =

On these assumptions the value of labour-power, and the magnitude of
surplus value, are determined by three laws.

"(1.)" A working day of given length always creates the same amount of
value, no matter how the productiveness of labour, and, with it, the
mass of the product, and the price of each single commodity produced,
may vary.

If the value created by a working day of 12 hours be, say, six
shillings, then, although the mass of the articles produced varies with
the productiveness of labour, the only result is that the value
represented by six shillings is spread over a greater or less number of
articles.

"(2.)" surplus value and the value of labour-power vary in opposite
directions. A variation in the productiveness of labour, its increase
or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the
value of labour-power, and in the same direction in surplus value.

The value created by a working day of 12 hours is a constant quantity,
say, six shillings. This constant quantity is the sum of the surplus
value plus the value of the labour-power, which latter value the
labourer replaces by an equivalent. It is self-evident, that if a
constant quantity consists of two parts, neither of them can increase
without the other diminishing. Let the two parts at starting be equal;
3 shillings value of labour-power, 3 shillings surplus value. Then the
value of the labour-power cannot rise from three shillings to four,
without the surplus value falling from three shillings to two; and the
surplus value cannot rise from three shillings to four, without the
value of labour-power falling from three shillings to two. Under these
circumstances, therefore, no change can take place in the absolute
magnitude, either of the surplus value, or of the value of
labour-power, without a simultaneous change in their relative
magnitudes, "i.e.", relatively to each other. It is impossible for them
to rise or fall simultaneously.

Further, the value of labour-power cannot fall, and consequently
surplus value cannot rise, without a rise in the productiveness of
labour. For instance, in the above case, the value of the labour-power
cannot sink from three shillings to two, unless an increase in the
productiveness of labour makes it possible to produce in 4 hours the
same quantity of necessaries as previously required 6 hours to produce.
On the other hand, the value of the labour-power cannot rise from three
shillings to four, without a decrease in the productiveness of labour,
whereby eight hours become requisite to produce the same quantity of
necessaries, for the production of which six hours previously sufficed.
It follows from this, that an increase in the productiveness of labour
causes a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise in
surplus value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such
productiveness causes a rise in the value of labour-power, and a fall
in surplus value.

In formulating this law, Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; although
a change in the magnitude of the surplus value or surplus labour causes
a change in the opposite direction in the magnitude of the value of
labour-power, or in the quantity of necessary labour, it by no means
follows that they vary in the same proportion. They do increase or
diminish by the same quantity. But their proportional increase or
diminution depends on their original magnitudes before the change in
the productiveness of labour took place. If the value of the
labour-power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour time 8 hours, and
the surplus value be 2 shillings, or the surplus labour 4 hours, and
if, in consequence of an increase in the productiveness of labour, the
value of the labour-power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour
to 6 hours, the surplus value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus
labour to 6 hours. The same quantity, 1 shilling or 2 hours, is added
in one case and subtracted in the other. But the proportional change of
magnitude is different in each case. While the value of the
labour-power falls from 4 shillings to 3, "i.e.", by 1/4 or 25%, the
surplus value rises from 2 shillings to 3, "i.e.", by  1/2 or 50%. It
therefore follows that the proportional increase or diminution in
surplus value, consequent on a given change in the productiveness of
labour, depends on the original magnitude of that portion of the
working day which embodies itself in surplus value; the smaller that
portion, the greater is the proportional change; the greater that
portion, the less is the proportional change.

"(3.)" Increase or diminution in surplus value is always consequent on,
and never the cause of, the corresponding diminution or increase in the
value of labour-power.

Since the working day is constant in magnitude, and is represented by a
value of constant magnitude, since, to every variation in the magnitude
of surplus value, there corresponds an inverse variation in the value
of labour-power, and since the value of labour-power cannot change,
except in consequence of a change in the productiveness of labour, it
clearly follows, under these conditions, that every change of magnitude
in surplus value arises from an inverse change of magnitude in the
value of labour-power. If, then, as we have already seen, there can be
no change of absolute magnitude in the value of labour-power, and in
surplus value, unaccompanied by a change in their relative magnitudes,
so now it follows that no change in their relative magnitudes is
possible, without a previous change in the absolute magnitude of the
value of labour-power.

According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of surplus value,
presupposes a movement in the value of labour-power, which movement is
brought about by a variation in the productiveness of labour. The limit
of this change is given by the altered value of labour-power.
Nevertheless, even when circumstances allow the law to operate,
subsidiary movements may occur. For example: if in consequence of the
increased productiveness of labour, the value of labour-power falls
from 4 shillings to 3, or the necessary labour time from 8 hours to 6,
the price of labour-power may possibly not fall below 3s. 8d., 3s. 6d.,
or 3s. 2d., and the surplus value consequently not rise above 3s. 4d.,
3s. 6d., or 3s. 10d. The amount of this fall, the lowest limit of which
is 3 shillings (the new value of labour-power), depends on the relative
weight, which the pressure of capital on the one side, and the
resistance of the labourer on the other, throws into the scale.

The value of labour-power is determined by the value of a given
quantity of necessaries. It is the value and not the mass of these
necessaries that varies with the productiveness of labour. It is,
however, possible that, owing to an increase of productiveness, both
the labourer and the capitalist may simultaneously be able to
appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, without any change
in the price of labour-power or in surplus value. If the value of
labour-power be 3 shillings, and the necessary labour time amount to 6
hours, if the surplus value likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus
labour 6 hours, then if the productiveness of labour were doubled
without altering the ratio of necessary labour to surplus labour, there
would be no change of magnitude in surplus value and price of
labour-power. The only result would be that each of them would
represent twice as many use-values as before; these use-values being
twice as cheap as before. Although labour-power would be unchanged in
price, it would be above its value. If, however, the price of
labour-power had fallen, not to 1s. 6d., the lowest possible point
consistent with its new value, but to 2s. 10d. or 2s. 6d., still this
lower price would represent an increased mass of necessaries. In this
way it is possible with an increasing productiveness of labour, for the
price of labour-power to keep on falling, and yet this fall to be
accompanied by a constant growth in the mass of the labourer's means of
subsistence. But even in such case, the fall in the value of
labour-power would cause a corresponding rise of surplus value, and
thus the abyss between the labourer's position and that of the
capitalist would keep widening.

Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have
above stated. But he falls into the following errors: (1) he looks upon
the special conditions under which these laws hold good as the general
and sole conditions of capitalist production. He knows no change,
either in the length of the working day, or in the intensity of labour;
consequently with him there can be only one variable factor, viz., the
productiveness of labour; (2), and this error vitiates his analysis
much more than (1), he has not, any more than have the other
economists, investigated surplus value as such, "i.e.", independently
of its particular forms, such as profit, rent, &c. He therefore
confounds together the laws of the rate of surplus value and the laws
of the rate of profit. The rate of profit is, as we have already said,
the ratio of the surplus value to the total capital advanced; the rate
of surplus value is the ratio of the surplus value to the variable part
of that capital. Assume that a capital C of Pounds 500 is made up of
raw material, instruments of labour, &c. (c) to the amount of Pounds
400; and of wages (v) to the amount of Pounds 100; and further, that
the surplus value (s) = Pounds 100. Then we have rate of surplus value
s/v = Pounds 100/Pounds 100 = 100%. But the rate of profit s/c =
Pounds 100/Pounds 500 = 20%. It is, besides, obvious that the rate of
profit may depend on circumstances that in no way affect the rate of
surplus value. I shall show in Book III. that, with a given rate of
surplus value, we may have any number of rates of profit, and that
various rates of surplus value may, under given conditions, express
themselves in a single rate of profit.

=== Section 2: Working day Constant. Productiveness of Labour Constant.
Intensity of Labour Variable == =

Increased intensity of labour means increased expenditure of labour in
a given time. Hence a working day of more intense labour is embodied in
more products than is one of less intense labour, the length of each
day being the same. Increased productiveness of labour also, it is
true, will supply more products in a given working day. But in this
latter case, the value of each single product falls, for it costs less
labour than before; in the former case, that value remains unchanged,
for each article costs the same labour as before. Here we have an
increase in the number of products, unaccompanied by a fall in their
individual prices: as their number increases, so does the sum of their
prices. But in the case of increased productiveness, a given value is
spread over a greater mass of products. Hence the length of the working
day being constant, a day's labour of increased intensity will be
incorporated in an increased value, and, the value of money remaining
unchanged, in more money. The value created varies with the extent to
which the intensity of labour deviates from its normal intensity in the
society. A given working day, therefore, no longer creates a constant,
but a variable value; in a day of 12 hours of ordinary intensity, the
value created is, say 6 shillings, but with increased intensity, the
value created may be 7, 8, or more shillings. It is clear that, if the
value created by a day's labour increases from, say, 6 to 8 shillings
then the two parts into which this value is divided, viz., price of
labour-power and surplus value, may both of them increase
simultaneously, and either equally or unequally. They may both
simultaneously increase from 3 shillings to 4. Here, the rise in the
price of labour-power does not necessarily imply that the price has
risen above the value of labour-power. On the contrary, the rise in
price may be accompanied by a fall in value. This occurs whenever the
rise in the price of labour-power does not compensate for its increased
wear and tear.

We know that, with transitory exceptions, a change in the
productiveness of labour does not cause any change in the value of
labour-power, nor consequently in the magnitude of surplus value,
unless the products of the industries affected are articles habitually
consumed by the labourers. In the present case this condition no longer
applies. For when the variation is either in the duration or in the
intensity of labour, there is always a corresponding change in the
magnitude of the value created, independently of the nature of the
article in which that value is embodied.

If the intensity of labour were to increase simultaneously and equally
in every branch of industry, then the new and higher degree of
intensity would become the normal degree for the society, and would
therefore cease to be taken account of. But still, even then, the
intensity of labour would be different in different countries, and
would modify the international application of the law of value. The
more intense working day of one nation would be represented by a
greater sum of money than would the less intense day of another nation.

=== Section 3: Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length
of the Working day Variable == =

The working day may vary in two ways. It may be made either longer or
shorter. From our present data, and within the limits of the
assumptions made above we obtain the following laws:

"(1.)" The working day creates a greater or less amount of value in
proportion to its length -- thus, a variable and not a constant
quantity of value.

"(2.)" Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of surplus
value and of the value of labour-power arises from a change in the
absolute magnitude of the surplus labour, and consequently of the
surplus value.

"(3.)" The absolute value of labour-power can change only in
consequence of the reaction exercised by the prolongation of surplus
labour upon the wear and tear of labour-power. Every change in this
absolute value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a
change in the magnitude of surplus value.

We begin with the case in which the working day is shortened.

"(1.)" A shortening of the working day under the conditions given
above, leaves the value of labour-power, and with it, the necessary
labour time, unaltered. It reduces the surplus labour and surplus
value. Along with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative
magnitude also falls, "i.e., "its magnitude relatively to the value of
labour-power whose magnitude remains unaltered. Only by lowering the
price of labour-power below its value could the capitalist save himself
harmless.

All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working day,
assume that it takes place under the conditions we have here supposed
to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the
productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or immediately
follows, a shortening of the working day.

"(2.)" Lengthening of the working day. Let the necessary labour time be
6 hours, or the value of labour-power 3 shillings; also let the surplus
labour be 6 hours or the surplus value 3 shillings. The whole working
day then amounts to 12 hours and is embodied in a value of 6 shillings.
If, now, the working day be lengthened by 2 hours and the price of
labour-power remain unaltered, the surplus value increases both
absolutely and relatively. Although there is no absolute change in the
value of labour-power, it suffers a relative fall. Under the conditions
assumed in 1. there could not be a change of relative magnitude in the
value of labour-power without a change in its absolute magnitude. Here,
on the contrary, the change of relative magnitude in the value of
labour-power is the result of the change of absolute magnitude in
surplus value.

Since the value in which a day's labour is embodied, increases with the
length of that day, it is evident that the surplus value and the price
of labour-power may simultaneously increase, either by equal or unequal
quantities. This simultaneous increase is therefore possible in two
cases, one, the actual lengthening of the working day, the other, an
increase in the intensity of labour unaccompanied by such lengthening.

When the working day is prolonged, the price of labour-power may fall
below its value, although that price be nominally unchanged or even
rise. The value of a day's labour-power is, as will be remembered,
estimated from its normal average duration, or from the normal duration
of life among the labourers, and from corresponding normal
transformations of organised bodily matter into motion, in conformity
with the nature of man. Up to a certain point, the increased wear and
tear of labour-power, inseparable from a lengthened working day, may be
compensated by higher wages. But beyond this point the wear and tear
increases in geometrical progression, and every condition suitable for
the normal reproduction and functioning of labour-power is suppressed.
The price of labour-power and the degree of its exploitation cease to
be commensurable quantities.

=== Section 4: Simultaneous Variations in the Duration, Productiveness,
and Intensity of Labour == =

It is obvious that a large number of combinations are here possible.
Any two of the factors may vary and the third remain constant, or all
three may vary at once. They may vary either in the same or in
different degrees, in the same or in opposite directions, with the
result that the variations counteract one another, either wholly or in
part. Nevertheless the analysis of every possible case is easy in view
of the results given in I., II., and III. The effect of every possible
combination may be found by treating each factor in turn as variable,
and the other two constant for the time being. We shall, therefore,
notice, and that briefly, but two important cases.

==== A. Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous
Lengthening of the Working day === =

In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here refer to
diminution in those industries whose products determine the value of
labour-power; such a diminution, for example, as results from
decreasing fertility of the soil, and from the corresponding dearness
of its products. Take the working day at 12 hours and the value created
by it at 6 shillings, of which one half replaces the value of the
labour-power, the other forms the surplus value. Suppose, in
consequence of the increased dearness of the products of the soil, that
the value of labour-power rises from 3 shillings to 4, and therefore
the necessary labour time from 6 hours to 8. If there be no change in
the length of the working day, the surplus labour would fall from 6
hours to 4, the surplus value from 3 shillings to 2. If the day be
lengthened by 2 hours, "i.e.", from 12 hours to 14, the surplus labour
remains at 6 hours, the surplus value at 3 shillings

Earlier English translations have '6 sh.' instead of 3 shillings. This
error was pointed out to us by a reader, we have investigated and
checked with the 1872 German Edition and duly corrected an obvious
error.

, but the surplus value decreases compared with the value of
labour-power, as measured by the necessary labour time. If the day be
lengthened by 4 hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional
magnitudes of surplus value and value of labour-power, of surplus
labour and necessary labour, continue unchanged, but the absolute
magnitude of surplus value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the
surplus labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33 1/3%. Therefore,
with diminishing productiveness of labour and a simultaneous
lengthening of the working day, the absolute magnitude of surplus value
may continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude
diminishes; its relative magnitude may continue unchanged, at the same
time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, provided the
lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may increase.

In the period between 1799 and 1815 the increasing price of provisions
led in England to a nominal rise in wages, although the real wages,
expressed in the necessaries of life, fell. From this fact West and
Ricardo drew the conclusion, that the diminution in the productiveness
of agricultural labour had brought about a fall in the rate of surplus
value, and they made this assumption of a fact that existed only in
their imaginations, the starting-point of important investigations into
the relative magnitudes of wages, profits, and rent. But, as a matter
of fact, surplus value had at that time, thanks to the increased
intensity of labour, and to the prolongation of the working day,
increased both in absolute and relative magnitude. This was the period
in which the right to prolong th
